>

The Key

To Understanding

ISLAM
© Copyright Abdul Rahman Abdul Kareem Al-Sheha
- Fifth Edition - 2011 / 1432
All rights reserved for the author except for free distribution, without
any addition, modification, or deletion to any part of the booklet.
To make high quality reprints, you may contact author to obtain free
copies of the computer print files of this book, and If you have any
corrections, comments, or questions about this publication, please
feel free to contact us at: Info@thekeytoislam.com
The Web Site of This Book
This book in its complete form is available online to read and
enjoy at:
www.thekeytoIslam.com
Translated by:
Abdurrahmaan Murad
General Editors:
• Professor Kamal Hassan Ali ( World Languages Multicultural and
Gender Studies Director)
• Dr. Ahmad Turkistani (Associate Professor at Imam University)
• Dr. Khider Al-Shibani (solid state physics)
• Dr. Ibrahim bin Sa’ad Abu Nayyan
• Dr. Um Hssan Al- Shareef (Literature)
• Dauwd Abu Sulaiman Mavins
• Khalid Walter Denston
• Abdul-Salaam Abdul-Lateef
• Abdulsalaam Schalabi
• Annie Torres

Contents

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

1. What is Islam? ........................................................................................
• What do they say about Islam? ....................................................
• The Pillars of Islam .........................................................................
• Who is the Messenger of Islam? .....................................................
• What do they say about Muhammad ()? ......................................
• Pillars of Faith .................................................................................
• What is the Qur’an? .......................................................................
• What do they say about the Qur’an? ...........................................
2. The Fundamental Goals of Islam .............................................................
3. Etiquettes, Manners, and Morals in Islam ...............................................
4. Rights in Islam ........................................................................................
5. What do you know about Islam? ........................................................
6. Islam and Wealth .....................................................................................
7. Islam and Women ....................................................................................
8. Islamic Perspective on Sex ......................................................................
9. Islam and Non-Muslims ...........................................................................
10. Islam and Other Divine Religions ..........................................................
11. Muslims love Jesus and his Mother .......................................................
12. Islam and Jihad .....................................................................................
12. Islam is the Faith of Peace.....................................................................
13. Islam and Society ..................................................................................
14. Islam and Cleanliness ............................................................................
15. Islam and Knowledge .............................................................................
16. The Effects of Islamic Civilization on Modern Science ............................
17. The Virtues of Islamic Civilization .........................................................
18. Scientific Points in a few Verses of the Qur’an .....................................
19. The Qur’an and the Beginning of the World ..........................................
20. Qur’an on the Expansion of the Universe ..............................................
21. Qur’an on Celestial Bodies ....................................................................
22. Qur’an on Air Pressure ..........................................................................
23. Qur’an on Outer Space ..........................................................................
24. Qur’an on the Atom ...............................................................................
25. Qur’an on Embroyology..........................................................................
26. What is mentioned in the Qur’an about the Oceans...............................
• Qur’an on the Barrier Between Seas..............................................
• Qur’an on Darkness in the Seas ....................................................
• Qur’an on Internal Waves ..............................................................
27. Qur’an on Formation of Clouds and Rain .............................................
28. Qur’an on Animals .................................................................................
29. Qur’an on Mountains .............................................................................
30. Water and Life .......................................................................................
31. Who are those who show Enmity towards Islam? ...............................
32. Distinguishing Qualities and Privileges of Islam ...................................
33. Conclusion .............................................................................................
34. How Does One Become a Muslim? ....................................................
35. References ............................................................................................

2
4
5
6
7
12
14
15
18
19
20
22
31
32
34
35
36
38
39
42
45
46
48
49
54
55
57
60
62
65
66
67
68
75
75
76
77
79
84
85
87
88
93
97
98
99

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

FOREWORD
While the way of life known as Islam continues as the world’s most populace
religion—the traditional undercounting of Muslims by western statisticians
notwithstanding—the availability of useful Islamic information that speaks
to the needs of both practicing Muslims as well as interested others has
struggled to keep pace with the expanding community. Ironically, the post9/11 frenzy that has gripped western societies with an uncommon and often
irrational loathing for global Islam has, simultaneously, piqued the interest
of more inquisitive, pensive non-Muslim westerners whose skepticism
of mass media accounts of predatory Islamic “extremists” and “America
haters” doesn’t match with their personal experiences of the Muslims they
encounter in their neighborhoods, in their classrooms, or on their jobs.
Consequently, they seek the truth of the religion and strike out on their own
to find answers to questions that are either ignored in the popular media, or
are given the familiar “spin” that underwrites misinformation. What results is
an informational void that cries out for a meaningful, serious response.
Abdul-Rahman al-Sheha, in his groundbreaking compendium The Key to
Understanding Islam has not only addressed this need, but has introduced a
uniquely constructed format that is as “user friendly” as it is comprehensive
and scholarly.
The Islamic revival that accompanied Muslim’s throwing off the yoke of
colonialism in the mid-20th century did not suffer from a dearth of scholars
or scholarship aimed at consolidating new found freedoms within the divine
Mercy of the Book of Allah and the traditions of His Noble Prophet. Indeed,
the genius of these early Muslim sages helped to re-construct the framework
that houses today’s resurgent Islamic movements. But many if not all of these
definitive Islamic treatises are written in a language and style that appeal to
those who, for the most part, are either already Muslim, or are comfortable
conversing in dense, scholarly terms. Al-Sheha’s Key, in one simply written
volume, offers a wealth of information that is, at once, revelatory for the
non-Muslim who seeks a clear and concise understanding of what IS, and
what IS NOT Islam, while providing a supremely well-organized inventory of
traditionally sourced overviews on faith, worship, and social issues for the
practicing Muslim. Clearly, this approach to dispensing critical information

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

on the life-affirming message of Islam presents a fresh and wholly inviting
opportunity for presenting Islam while maintaining, immutably, the pristine
principles of the Faith.
The Key to Understanding Islam combines the insightful, knowledgeable
eye of the scholar with the empathy of a socially conscious researcher.
The result is an informative, compelling narrative that treats, for example,
the essentials of Muslim worship, and the Islamic interpretation of
astrophysics, al-Haitham, and Edwin Hubble, with equal clarity and aplomb,
and importantly, connects them all together with appropriate references
from the Qur’an, Prophetic traditions, or both. The breadth and depth of
the subject covered is truly remarkable, and stands as a testimony to the
enormous talent and sagacity of the author.
In its content, its style, its singularly important contribution to the global
dialogue on religion in contemporary life, al-Sheha’s The Key to Understanding
Islam takes its place among the most important works of its kind; it redefines
the contours of this discussion while establishing improved methods for
illuminating the Islamic underpinnings of European science and culture. It
is a truly seminal work that will hopefully influence the next generation of
Muslim scholars who choose to sow the fallow fields of presenting Islam
as their life’s work. We pray for the universal acceptance of this bounteous
offering; and we pray Allah, the Almighty, the One, the Sublime, to imbue
Muslims and avail non-Muslims of the guidance and the knowledge of the
best in this world, and the Best in the Life to Come.
Head of Research & Development for the
Canadian Dawah Association
Professor Kamal Hassan Ali, M. Ed., Ed.D.

Westfield State College
Westfield, MA
USA

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

The Key

to Understanding

ISLAM

by:
Dr. Abdul-Rahman Al-Sheha

5

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Allah () says:

Say (O Muslims): We belive
in God and that which is revealed
to us and that which was revealed to
Abraham, and Ishmael, and Isaac, and
Jacob, and the Tribes, and that which
Moses and Jesus received, and that which
the Prophets received from their Lord.
We make no distinction between
any of them, and to Him we have
surrendered (as Muslims).
(Qur’an 2:136)

In the name of Allah, the Most Benevolent, the Most Merciful

All praise is due to Allah, the LordI of the worlds, and
may He praise His Prophet (), and render him and his
household safe from all evil.
This booklet explains briefly the last Divine ReligionII
which abrogates all previous religions. According to
the latest surveys, Islam is the religion of over a billion
followers worldwide. People are accepting it in large
numbers, despite the fact that the callers to Islam receive
insufficient financial and moral backing. Moreover, one
rarely hears of a Muslim apostasizing after accepting
Islam!
In Islam, knowledge and scholars are highly regarded
and given prestige in Muslim society. The Qur’an is not
a book of science however, the Qur’an is the basic law
which outlines the details of a Muslim’s life. In it we find
mention of political, social, economical, moral and other
aspects.
My goal in this book is not to tie every modern scientific
breakthrough man has discovered with a verse from the
Qur’an.
I have mentioned some scientific facts in this book,
merely to clarify that there are verses in the Qur’an which
contain accurate scientific information, which have only
been discovered very recently by modern science.
I invite all to read this book and to contemplate the signs
of God and to strive to learn the true religion of God.
I

The actual word used in the Qur’an is Rubb. There is no proper equivalent for
Rubb in the English language. It means the Creator, the Fashioner, the Provider, the One upon Whom all creatures depend for their means of subsistence,
and the One Who gives life and causes death.
II The word translated as religion is Deen, which in Arabic commonly refers to
a way of life, which is both private and public. It is an inclusive term meaning:
acts of worship, political practice, and a detailed code of conduct, including
hygiene or etiquette matters.

1

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

What is Islam?
Islam is to submit to Allah in His Oneness (Monotheism), to be
subservient to Him in obedience and not to associate any partners, rivals,
and intercessors with Him. It is a religion of tolerance and ease.
Allah (I) says:
Allah intends for you ease and does not intend for you hardship.
(2:185)

• Islam is a religion through which one finds spiritual contentment and
would have peace of heart.
Allah () says:
Those who believe, and whose hearts find their rest in the remembrance
of Allah – for, verily, in the remembrance of Allah hearts do find their
rest. (13:28)

• Islam is a religion of mercy and compassion. The Messenger of
Allah (II) said:
“The All-Merciful shows mercy to those who show mercy. Show mercy
to those on earth, and you will be shown mercy by the One above the
heavens.” (TirmidhiIII)

• Islam is a religion of love and loving good for others. The Messenger of

Allah () said:

“The most beloved of people to Allah are those who are most beneficial to
others.” (Tabaraani)

• Islam is a religion which has no confusion or ambiguity associated with
it. Allah () says:
And We sent not before you except men to whom We revealed [Our
message]. So ask the people of the message [i.e. former scriptures] if
you do not know.  (16:43)
I () means: May He be Exalted.
II () means: May Peace and Blessings be upon him.
III All names mentioned after the oral traditions of the Prophet Muhammad are scholars who collected his
sayings from his Companions and put them into books.

2

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

• Islam is a religion for all, for it is a call directed to humankind at large, not
to a specific race or people. Allah () says:

And We have not sent you except to all of humanity, as a herald
of glad tidings and a warner. But most of the people do not know.
(34:28)

• Islam is a religion which effaces all previous sins. The Prophet () said:
“Islam effaces all (sins) committed before it.” (Muslim)

• Islam is a complete and perfect religion which abrogates all previous
revelations, and it is the last religion. Allah () says:

This day I have perfec ed for you your religion
and completed My favor upon you and have
chosen for you Islam as
your religion. (5:3)

Islam comprises a number
of acts of worship, among
which some are verbal,
physical and creedal
acts of worship. These
acts of worship play an
important role in refining
one’s manners, purifying
one’s soul, reforming
oneself, and maintaining
the integrity and unity of
Muslim society.
Figure: The Door of the ‘Ka’bah’. It is made from pure
gold in reverence of the Ka’bah. It is only opened once
a year, when it is washed before Hajj, and when it is
covered with a new ‘Kiswah’ (covering).

3

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

What do they say about Islam?
W. Montgomery Watt in his book: ‘What is Islam?’ said:
“Prejudice is only one of the difficulties to be met by the European or
American student of Islam. As soon as he begins to describe Islam as ‘the
religion of the Qur’an”, or “the religion of the four hundred million Muslims of
today”, he introduces a category which does not fit the category
of ‘religion’. For what does “religion” now mean to the
Occidental? At best, for the ordinary man, it means
a way of spending an hour or so on Sundays in
practices which give him some support and
strength in dealing with the problems of daily
life, and which encourages him to be friendly
towards other persons and to maintain the
standards of sexual propriety; it has little or
nothing to do with commerce or economics
or politics or industrial relationships. At
worst it fosters an attitude of complacency
in the more prosperous individuals and
breeds smugness. The European may even
look at religion as an opiate developed by
exploiters of the common people in order to
keep them in subjugation. How different from
the connotations to the Muslim of the verse
(3:19): “the true religion with God is Islam!” The
word translated as ‘religion’ is Dīn, which, in Arabic,
commonly refers to a whole way of life. It is not a private
matter for individuals, touching only the periphery of their lives,
but something which is both private and public, something which permeates
the whole fabric of society in a way of which men are conscious. It is all in
one theological dogma, forms of worship, political theory, and a detailed
code of conduct, including even matters which the European would classify
as hygiene or etiquette.”1

4

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

The Pillars of Islam
Physical and verbal acts of worship are called the Pillars of Islam. There
are five Pillars of Islam.They are as follows:
1 The Testimony of Faith (Shahaadatayn):
This is the testimony that ‘none has the right to be worshipped but Allah,
and that Muhammad is His slave and Messenger’. This testimony is the
key with which one becomes a Muslim.The meaning of the first part of the
testimony, “none has the right to be worshipped but Allah”, is that:
1) Allah is the Creator of all that exists.
2) Allah is the Proprietor of all that exists and the Disposer of all affairs.
3) Allah is the One Who deserves to be worshipped alone.

There is no other God worthy of worship except Allah, and Mohammad is
his messenger.

The meaning of the second part of the testimony, ‘Muhammad is His slave
and Messenger’ contains the following meanings:
1) To obey the Messenger () in what he ordered.
2) To believe in everything he said.
3) To refrain from what he prohibited and warned against.
4) And that you do not worship Allah except by what the Messenger ()
legislated.
5

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Who is the Messenger of Islam ?
He is Abul-Qasim, Muhammad, the son of Abdu-llah, the son of AbdulMuttalib, the son of Hashim. He belonged to the Arab tribe of Quraish whose
ancestry traces back to ‘Adnaan, one of the children of Ismaa’eel (Ishmael),
the Prophet of Allah. Ishmael was the son of Ibraaheem (Abraham), who
was the Messenger of Allah, may Allah praise him.
He was born in the year 571 C.E. in the honored city of Makkah. Makkah
was the religious center of the Arabian Peninsula, as it housed the
Honored Ka’bah, which was built by Abraham and his son,
Ishmael.
Even before he received revelation,
he was known amongst his people
as ‘The Trustworthy’, and they would
entrust him with their possessions
when they intended to go on a
journey. He was also known as
‘The Truthful’. He never lied or
acted treacherously. He always
desired good for others.
He received his first revelation
at the age of forty and informed
his wife, Khadeejah, may
Allah be pleased with her,
apprehensively:
“Indeed I fear for myself.”
Khadeejah replied, “No, by Allah!
Allah will never humiliate you. Indeed you
maintain ties of kinship, you bear the problems
of others, you give wealth to those who do not have it,
you honor and feed your guests, and you give support in times of true
calamity.” (Bukhari)
6

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

He remained in Makkah for thirteen years thereafter, calling people to
believe in the Oneness of Allah. He then migrated to the city of Medina and
called its inhabitants to Islam, which they accepted. There, Allah revealed
to him the remaining legislations of the religion. He returned and conquered
Makkah eight years after his migration, and died at the age of sixty three
after Allah revealed to him the entire Qur’an. All of the legislations of the
religion were perfected and completed and the majority of the Arab nations
accepted Islam.

What do they say about Muhammad ()?
George Bernard Shaw in The Genuine Islam said:
“I have always held the religion of Muhammad in high estimation because
of its wonderful vitality. It is the only religion which appears to possess that
assimilating capability to the changing phases of existence which make
itself appeal to every age - I have prophesized about the faith of Muhammad
that it would be acceptable tomorrow as it is beginning to be acceptable
to the Europe of today. Medieval ecclesiastics, either through ignorance
or bigotry, painted Mohammedanism in the darkest colors. They were, in
fact, trained to hate both the man Muhammad and his religion. To them,
Muhammad was an anti-Christ. I have studied him, the wonderful man, and
in my opinion, far from being an anti-Christ, he must be called the Savior of
Humanity.”2
Annie Besant3 in The Life and Teachings of Mohammad, said:
“It is impossible for anyone who studies the life and character of the
great Prophet of Arabia, who knew how he taught and how he lived, to feel
anything but reverence for the mighty Prophet, one of the great messengers
of the Supreme. And although in what I put to you I shall say many things
which may be familiar to many, yet I myself feel, whenever I reread them,
a new way of admiration, a new sense of reverence for that mighty Arabian
teacher.”

7

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

2 The Prayer (Salaah):
The prayer is a means through which a slave of Allah maintains a
relationship between him/herself and his/her Lord. In it, the person privately
converses with his/her Lord, seeking His forgiveness and asking Him for
help and guidance. There are five prayers which must be performed daily.
Men observe them in the Masjid (mosque) in congregation, except for
those who have a valid excuse. Through this, Muslims come to know one
another, and the bonds of love and unity which hold them together are built,
maintained and strengthened. They come to know of the condition of their
fellow Muslims on a daily basis. If someone is not present and thought to
be sick, they visit him, and if it seems that he is falling short in some of his
obligations, they advise him. All social differences, such as class, race, and
lineage are disregarded. Muslims line up side by side in straight rows, all
facing one direction (Makkah), all at the same time. All are rendered equal
in regards to their subservience to Allah when standing before Him.

Figure: A large assembly of believers prostrating themselves to God, the Exalted, in unique
array, which clearly demonstrates their humbleness and submissivon to Him.

8

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

3 The Obligatory Charity (Zakaah):
This charity is a small percentage of wealth which a rich Muslim gives to
his less fortunate brothers and sisters. There are certain conditions under
which it is to be given. A Muslim gives it willingly and fulfills the command of
Allah when giving it out.
The goal behind the obligation of this charity is to revive mutual and social
support among Muslims, as well as to eradicate poverty and put an end
to the dangers which result from it. Through it, the hearts of the rich are
cleansed from greed, and the hearts of the poor are cleansed from hate and
jealousy which they may feel towards the rich. They see the rich giving from
their wealth that which Allah decreed, continuously giving them money and
caring for their needs.

Linguistically speaking, ‘Zakaah’ means ‘an increase’. It
increases one’s wealth, and safeguards it from misfortunes.
Charities are rewarded for graciously by Allah.

9

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

4 The Fast of Ramadan (Siyaam):
It is obligatory upon every Muslim to fast once a year, for the entire month of
Ramadan. From the break of dawn until the sun sets, Muslims must abstain
from anything that breaks the fast, whether it is food, drink, or sexual
intercourse. Fasting is an act of worship in Islam and was an obligation
legislated in the previous religions as well.
Allah () says:
O you who have believed, fasting has been decreed for you as it was
decreed upon those before you that you may become righteous.
(2:183)

Muslims use the lunar calendar to determine the beginning and end of each month. It is also
used to determine the beginning of ‘religious seasons’ (such as fasting and Hajj).

10

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

5 The Pilgrimage (Hajj):
Hajj is the pilgrimage one makes to the Sacred House of Allah (the Ka’bah)
in order to perform certain rites at specific places and times. This pillar of
Islam is obligatory upon every Muslim, male or female, who is sane and has
reached the age of puberty once in a lifetime, if they have the physical and
financial capability to perform it.
Allah () says:
Pilgrimage to the House is a duty owed to Allah by all people who are
able to undertake it. And as for those who deny the truth – verily, Allah
does not stand in need of anything in all the worlds. (3:97)
Hajj is the largest Islamic gathering. Muslims from all over the world come
together in one place at one time; they all call upon the same Lord, wear the
same clothes, and perform the same rituals. No difference is made between
rich and poor, noble and ignoble, white and black, Arab and non-Arab; all
are equal in front of Allah. There is no difference between them except in
piety (taqwaa). The Hajj is an event which emphasizes the brotherhood of
all Muslims and the unity of their hopes and feelings.

Pilgrims go around the ‘Ka’bah’ during the Hajj season. The Sacred Masjid al-Haram in
Makkah can accommodate over two million people at any one time.

11

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Pillars of Faith
Creedal acts of worship are called the Pillars of Faith (Imaan); and there are
six Pillars of Faith.They are as follows:
1 Belief in Allah:
Belief in Allah entails belief in His existence, that He is the only One Who
deserves to be worshipped, and He has no partners, equals or rivals in His
Lordship (Ruboobiyah)4, Unity (Uloohiyah)5, and His beautiful Names and
Attributes6. He is the Creator of this existence, its Proprietor and the One
who disposes of all its affairs. Only that which He wishes comes to pass and
He is the only One who deserves to be worshipped.

This is the 112th chapter in the Qur’an. It was revealed when the polytheists
asked Prophet Muhammad to describe the Lord of the worlds.

Allah () says:
Say, ‘He is Allah, [who is] One. * Allah As-Samad [the Self-Sufficient
Master, Whom all creatures need]. * He neither begets nor is born. * Nor
is there to Him any equal.  (112:1-4)
12

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

2 Belief in Allah’s Angels:
This is to believe that the angels exist. No one knows their exact number
except Him (Allah). He created them to worship Him.
Allah () says:
Never would the Messiah disdain to be a slave of Allah, nor would the
angels near [to Allah].  (4:172)
The angels do not share any of Allah’s specific qualities, nor are they His
children. Rather, Allah created them to perform certain tasks.
Allah () says:
And they say, ‘The Most Merciful
has taken a son.’ Exalted is He!
Rather, they [Those they claim to
be ‘children’ of Allah, such as the
angels, Ezra, Jesus, etc.] are [but]
honored slaves. They cannot
precede Him in word, and they
act by His command  (21:2627)
3 Belief in Allah’s Books:
It is to believe that Allah ()
revealed Divine Books to His
Messengers in order for them to
be conveyed to humankind. These
The Holy Qur’an
Books contained nothing but the
truth at the time of revelation. All these Books called people to the Oneness
of Allah, and that He is the Creator, Proprietor and Owner, and to Him belong
the beautiful Names and Attributes. Some of these Books are as follows:
13

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

• The Suhuf (Scriptures of Abraham):

The Suhuf are the Sacred
Scriptures which was revealed to Prophet Abraham (I).

• The Tawraah (Torah): The Torah is the Sacred Book which was revealed
to Prophet Moses ().

• The Zaboor (Psalms): The Zaboor is the Sacred Book which was
revealed to Prophet David ().

• The Injeel (Gospel): The Injeel is the Sacred Book which was revealed
to Prophet Jesus ().

• The Noble Qur’an: One must believe that the Qur’an is the Speech of

Allah which Angel Gabriel () brought to Muhammad () and that it is the
last of the Divine Books which abrogated all previous Books.

What is the Qur’an?
The Qur’an is the constitution of the Muslims from which they derive the
teachings which organize both their religious and everyday affairs. It differs
from the previous Divine Books in the following ways:

• It is the last Divine Book which was revealed, and for that reason, Allah,
the Exalted, promised to protect it from any distortion until the Last Day.
Allah () says:
Indeed, it is We who have sent down this Reminder [i.e., the Qur’an]
and indeed, it is We Who are its Guardian.  (15:9)

• The Qur’an includes all the legislations which reform society and
guarantees happiness for all in its implementation.

• The Qur’an has documented the stories of the Prophets and Messengers,

and what happened between them and their peoples, from Adam () till
Muhammad ().
I

() means: Peace be upon him.
14

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

• It was revealed to all of humankind so that they would live a life of peace and
happiness, and to take them out of darkness and bring them into the light.

• Reciting, memorizing and teaching it are acts of worship.
What do they say about the Qur’an ?
Maurice Bucaille said in his Book: The Qur’an, and
Modern Science:
‘A totally objective examination of it [the Qur’an] in
the light of modern knowledge, leads us to recognize
the agreement between the two, as has been
already noted on repeated occasions. It makes us
deem it quite unthinkable for a man of Muhammad’s
time to have been the author of such statements, on
account of the state of knowledge in his day. Such
considerations are part of what gives the Qur’anic
Revelation its unique place, and forces the impartial
scientist to admit his inability to provide an explanation
which calls solely upon materialistic reasoning.’
4 Belief in the Messengers of Allah:
It is to believe that Allah () chose the finest among mankind to be
Messengers whom He sent to His creation with specific legislations; to
worship and obey Him, and to establish His religion and His Tawheed
(oneness). Allah ordered His Messengers to convey the Message to people,
so that they would not have any proof against Him after He sent them.
Allah () says:
And We sent not before you, [O Muhammad] except men to whom We
revealed [the message] so ask the people of the message [i.e., former
scriptures] if you do not know.  (21:7)
The first Messenger was Noah () and the last was Muhammad ().
15

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

5 Belief in Judgment Day:
It is to believe that the life of this world will come to an end. Allah () says:
Everyone upon it [i.e., the earth] will perish. And there will remain the
Face of your Lord, Owner of Majesty and Honor. (55:26-27)
Following this, Allah will resurrect all creation, take them to account and
reward those who did well, due to their righteous deeds, belief (in Allah)
and adherence to their Prophets and Messengers with an everlasting life in
Jannah (The Heavenly Gardens).
He will punish those who committed evil deeds, disbelief, and were
disobedient to their messengers, with an everlasting life in Hell.
6 Belief in Qadhaa and Qadar (Predestination):
It is to believe that Allah () knew everything before it came into being, and
what will happen to it afterwards. He then brought them into existence, all in
accordance with His Knowledge and Measure.
Allah () said:
…and [Allah] has created each thing and measured it with [precise]
measure.  (25:2)
This belief does not contradict the fact that one must strive to attain things.
Belief in Divine Measure results in the following:

• Belief in Qadhaa and Qadar results in a clear conscience and peace of

heart. No room is left for one to feel sad about what happen or does not
come to be.

• It encourages knowledge and exploration of what Allah created in this
universe. Afflictions, such as diseases drive humans to seek a cure; this is
done by searching for the sources of medicine which Allah, the Most High,
created in this universe.
16

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

• It increases one’s dependence upon Allah and removes fear of the
creation. Ibn ‘Abbaas (I) said “I was behind the Messenger of Allah ()
one day and he () said to me:

“O young boy, I will teach you some words: Guard Allah’s commandments
and He will guard you. Guard Allah’s commandments, you will find Him in
front of you. If you ask, then ask Allah, and if you seek help, then seek help
from Allah and know that if the whole world was to gather to help you, they
would never be able to help you except with something which Allah has
already preordained for you. And if the whole world gathered to cause you
some harm, they would not be able to harm you except with something
which Allah has already preordained for you. The pens have been lifted, and
the scrolls have dried.” (Tirmidhi)

I

() means: May God be pleased with him.
17

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

The Fundamental Goals of Islam
The fundamental goals of Islam are:
1 Preservation of the religion of Islam
2 Preservation of life
3 Preservation of wealth
4 Preservation of mind
5 Preservation of lineage
6 Preservation of honor
The Prophet of Allah, Muhammad () said:
“Indeed Allah has made your lives, your wealth, and your honor inviolable,
like the sanctity of this day (the Day of ‘Arafah in Hajj), in this [sacred] month
(the month of Dhul-Hijjah, the 12th month of the Islamic Calendar) in this
[sacred] locality (Makkah and its surroundings). (Bukhari)
He () also said:
“Shall I tell you who a true believer is? A person with whom others entrust
their money and lives. A Muslim is one from whose tongue and hand others
are safe. A true fighter in the path of Allah is one who strives against the
inner yearnings of his self in order to obey Allah, and the true emigrant (one
who leaves a land of disbelief and emigrates to a land of belief) is one who
leaves sins and wrongful acts.” (Ibn Hibban)

18

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Etiquette, Manners, and Morals in Islam
Islam forbids all evil and licentious acts, whether in speech or deed.
Allah () says:
Say, ‘My Lord has only forbidden immoralities
– what is apparent of them and what is
concealed – and sin, and oppression
without right, and that you associate with
Allah that which He has not sent down
authority, and that you say about Allah
that which you do not know. (7:33)
It orders and encourages all good
morals and manners. The Prophet of Allah,
Muhammad () said:
“I have been sent to perfect righteous and
honorable manners.” (Hakim)
Allah the Exalted and Almighty said in the Glorious Qur’ân:
“Say: “Come, I will rehearse what Allah has (really) prohibited you
from”: join not anything as equal with Him; be good to your parents;
kill not your children on a plea of want - We provide sustenance for
you and for them - come not nigh to shameful deeds, whether open
or secret; take not life, which Allah has made sacred, except by way
of justice and law: thus does He command you, that you may learn
wisdom.”  (6:151)
The Messenger of Allah said:
“None of you believes until he loves for his brother what he loves for himself.”
(Bukhari)

19

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Rights in Islam
Islam has prescribed that its followers give people their due rights. Parents,
spouses, children, neighbours; all are given specific rights according to their
specific roles in this world. Accordingly mutual bonds and solidity established
and strengthened between the individuals of a Muslim society. This spreads
love and unity and prevents the society from fragmenting. Allah () says:
And worship Allah [alone], and do not
ascribe partners to Him. And do good
unto your parents and near of kin
and unto orphans, and the needy,
and the neighbor from among your
own people, and the neighbor who is
a stranger, and the friend by your side,
and the wayfarer, and those whom your
right hands possess. Verily, Allah does
not love those who are full of self-conceit
and boastful. (4:36)
The Prophet () said:
“Everyone of you is a guardian, and responsible for what is in his custody.
The ruler is a guardian of his subjects and responsible for them; a husband
is a guardian of his family and is responsible for it; a woman is a guardian of
her husband’s house and is responsible for it, and a servant is a guardian of
his master’s property and is responsible for it.” (Bukhari)
Also, the paths which people traverse have their rights that must be fulfilled.
The Messenger of Allah, Muhammad () said:
“Be careful and stay away from sitting on the paths.” They said, “O
Messenger of Allah, we have no other place to gather and talk.” So he
replied, “If you must do so, then give the path its right.” They said, “And what
is the right of the path?” He () replied, “Lowering one’s gaze (not looking
at members of the opposite sex), not bringing harm to others, replying to
salutations, and enjoining good and forbidding evil.” (Bukhari)
20

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Even animals have rights. Showing them compassion and treating them
well is a means to attain forgiveness of one’s sins. The Messenger of Allah,
Muhammad () said:
“Once a man was tending to some business, and became very thirsty.
He came across a well, so he descended into it and drank from it. [When
he came out], he saw a dog panting and rolling his mouth in dirt (in search
of water) due to thirst. The man said, ‘This dog is as thirsty as I was.’ So
he descended [once again] filled his boot with water and gave drink to the
dog. [Due to that] Allah rewarded him by forgiving his sins.” They said, “O
Messenger of Allah, will we be rewarded even due to our weltreatment of
animals?” He replied, “Yes indeed. For [the weltreatment of] every fresh
liver (living thing) you will receive reward.” (Bukhari)
Islam has made mistreating animals, such as confining them
[without food or drink] or torturing them, reasons for entering Hellfire. The
Messenger of Allah, Muhammad () said:
“A woman was punished due to a cat. She imprisoned it until it died, so
she entered the Hellfire because of this. She did not feed it nor give it drink
when she kept it, nor did she let it free to eat insects (and other things) of
the earth.” (Bukhari)
If this is the mercy Islam shows to animals, how much more mercy would
it show to humans, whom Allah has preferred and honored over all other
creatures?

21

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

What do you know about Islam?
1. The Ka’bah: When Ishmael - son of Abraham and Hagar - was born,
Abraham’s other wife, Sarah, became jealous, so she asked Abraham to
keep them away from her. Allah, the Exalted, inspired Abraham to take them
to Makkah. He would visit them from time to time. Once, he stayed away
from them for a period of time, and upon returning he saw Ishmael shooting
arrows near the well of Zamzam. When he saw him, he embraced him
the way a father would embrace his son, and said: ‘O Ishmael, Allah has
commanded me to build a House here.’ Together they erected the walls
of the House of Allah. Ishmael gathered the rocks and Abraham set them.
As the walls were being erected, he placed a stone where he stood and
Ibraheem and his son supplicated to Allah saying: ‘O Allah accept from us,
for indeed You are All-Hearing and All-Seeing.’
Muslims all over the world face the Ka’bah during their prayers; it is the first
House of Allah. Allah () says:
Indeed, the first House [of worship] established for mankind was at
Bakkah [i.e. Makkah] – blessed and a guidance for the worlds. (3:96)
It is a symbol of Muslim’s unity. Muslims face the Ka’bah with their hearts
and bodies.

22

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Allah () says:
So wherever you might turn, there is the Face of Allah [and He is High
above, over His Throne]. (2:115)
When the Muslims circumambulate around the House, they are not
worshipping it, for they worship Allah alone. Allah () says:
Let them worship the Lord of this House, Who has fed them [saving
them] from hunger and made them safe from fear. (106:3-4)
2. The Black Stone: After Abraham () finished erecting the Ka’bah, one
rock was missing (in order to complete the Ka’bah) so he asked Ishmael to
look for a rock. He searched and upon returning he found that his father had
placed a rock. So he asked his father: “O father where did you get this
rock from?” He said: “Gabriel brought it to me from the Heavens.” And
they completed the erection of the Ka’bah.
When this rock was sent down from the heavens, it was whiter than milk.
The Prophet () said:
“The Black Stone was
sent down from the
heavens whiter than milk
and it was blackened
by the sins of man.”
(Tirmidthi)

The Black Stone

The Black Stone is
positioned at the south
corner of the Ka’bah next
to its door. It is about 1.10
meters above the ground
and is set into the wall of
the Ka’bah. The one who
circumambulates around
the Ka’bah must make
sure the Black Stone is to
their left.
23

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

3. Station of Abraham: The Prophet () said:
“The Yemeni corner and Station of Ibraheem are two precious stones from
Jannah (Heavenly Gardens), and had it not been that Allah removed their
light, they would have enlightened all that was between the east and the
west.” (Ibn Hibban)
The Station of Abraham is the rock upon which Abraham () stood while
erecting the Ka’bah. His son Ishmael helped him erect it, by passing him
the rocks.

As Prophet Abraham () was
placing the stones, his footprints
were cast on the very stone he
stood on. Both Prophet Abraham
and his son Ishmael were
supplicating Allah:
“O our Lord accept from us!
Indeed you are the All-hearing The Station of Abraham
and All-seeing.” The footprints Of the miracles of Prophet Ibrahim () was
that the rock he stood on while building the
of Prophet Abraham are still visible Ka’bah turned soft and his feet sank into it. Until
today. At present, it is encased in a today, one can see the impressions of the feet
dome. God orders the believers to of Ibrahim on that rock.
perform prayers behind this station,
saying:  And We charged Abraham and Ishmael, [saying], “Purify My
House for those who perform Tawaf (i.e. circumambulate around the
House) and those who are staying [there] for worship and those who
bow and prostrate [in prayer].” (2:125)
24

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

4. The Well of Zamzam:
Abraham () took Hagar and her son, Ishmael to a place near the Ka’bah;
he left them under a tree at the site of Zamzam. No one lived in Makkah back
then, yet Abraham made them sit there, leaving them with some dates, and
a small water-skin. Thereafter he set out towards home. Ishmael’s mother
followed him saying: “O Abraham! Where are you going? There is no
person whose company we may enjoy, nor is there anything to take
pleasure in.” She repeated
that to him many times,
but he did not look back at
her. Then she asked him:
‘Has Allah ordered you
to do so?’ He said: ‘Yes.’
She said, ‘Then He will
not neglect us.’ Abraham
proceeded onwards, and
upon reaching a hill where
they could not see him,
he faced the Ka’bah and
invoked Allah saying:
Our Lord, I have settled
some of my descendants
in an uncultivated valley
near Your Sacred House.
The well is situated 21 meters from the Ka’bah. It is hand
Our Lord, that they may excavated and is about 30 meters deep, with an internal
establish
prayer.
So diameter ranging from 1.08 to 2.66 m
make hearts among the people incline toward them and provide for
them from the fruits that they might be grateful. (14:37)
Hagar suckled Ishmael and drank from the water she had. When the water
finished, she and her child became very thirsty, she saw her child in agony
while he cried. So she rushed to the nearest hillock, which was the hillock
of Safaa, she stood there and looked intensely hoping she might see someone, but she could not see anyone. She then descended and once she
reached the valley, she tucked up her robe and ran in the valley distressed,
until she reached the hillock of Marwaa. She gazed attentively, hoping to
25

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

see someone, but she could not. She repeated this seven times.
Ibn Ab’bas () said:
The Prophet () said, “This is the origin of the tradition of Sa’y (walking and
running) between the hillocks of Safaa and Marwaa. When she reached
al-Marwa (for the last time) she heard a voice and she calmed herself and
listened attentively. She heard the voice again and said, ‘O, (whoever you
may be)! You have made me hear your voice; have you got something to
help me?’ And behold! She saw an angel at the place of Zamzam tapping
the earth with its wing till water gushed from that place. Hagar quickly
contained the water by making a barrier around it. She filled her waterskin.”
The Prophet () added, “May Allah bestow mercy on Ishmael’s mother! Had
she let the Zamzam flow without trying to control it or had she not scooped
from that water to fill her water skin, Zamzam would have been a stream
flowing on the surface of the earth.” (Bukhari)
5. Safaa and Marwaa: These are the two hillocks which the mother of
Ishmael ran between and stood upon while searching for provisions and
water. In Hajj people walk and run between these two hillocks in adherence
to the Sunnah of the Prophet ().

The distance between
Safaa and Marwaa is
approximately 450 meters, so that seven trips
amount to roughly 3.15
kilometers.

26

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

6. Jamaraat: These are the places that Satan approached Abraham ()

when he left his wife and son in Makkah, in order to make him hesitate from
acting upon Allah’s orders. He took a few stones and pelted Satan. During
Hajj, Muslims throw stones at these pillars, in adherence to the Sunnah of
their father, Abraham (). They proclaim Satan an open enemy who must
be resisted; this is done by resisting the satanic desires and obeying the
commands of Allah and abstaining from the prohibitions.

There are three Jamarat in Mina: Jamratul Aqabah, Jamratul Wusta and Jamratus-Sughra. The
distance between the Jamrat as-Sughra and Jamratul-Wusta is 150 meters and the distance
between Jamratul-Aqabah and Jamratul-Wusta is 225 meters.

7. Muslim’s Eid Celebrations: Muslims have two celebrations a year; Eid
al-Fitr, which is celebrated at the end of the Month of Ramadhan, and it
signifies the end of the Fasting season. The second Eid festival is called
Eid al-Adha, it is called such because Muslims seek nearness to Allah by
slaughtering sacrificial animals in adherence to the example of our father
Ibraheem () . He saw in a dream that he was sacrificing his son Ishmael,
and the dreams of the Prophets are true. When he was about to sacrifice
his son, Allah said:
So We gave him good tidings of a forbearing boy. And when he
reached with him [the age of] exertion, he said, “O my son, indeed
27

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

I have seen in a dream that I [must] sacrifice you, so see what you
think.’ He said, “O my father, do as you are commanded. You will find
me, if Allah wills, of the steadfast.” And when they had both submitted
and he put Ishmael down upon his forehead. We called to Abraham,
“O Abraham you have fulfilled the vision. Indeed We thus reward the
doers of good." (37:101-105)

This is an Arabic word which means
wish you well this year and years to
come. It was written in calligraphy
style called (tagra) which were used
by the Ottoman sultans as a seal
during the Islamic Khilaffa.

8. The Prophet’s Masjid: It is the first Masjid to be built in Islam. The
Prophet () was buried in his house, which was adjacent to the Masjid,
as Prophets are to be buried where they die. It is praiseworthy to greet the
Prophet () when one passes by his grave.

Figure: The Prophet’s Mosque in Madinah can accommodate over two million people at one time.
Muslims perform prayer in the Prophet’s Mosque in order to attain the great reward promised for the
one who performs prayer in it.

28

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

9. Mount Hiraa: The Prophet
() used to spend many nights
at a time in this cave. Gabriel
() brought him the first revelation while he was in this cave.
Muslims should not go there,
since the Prophet () after being commissioned as a prophet
never returned to this cave.
Alnuor Mountain which hosts
the cave Hira, in which the angel Gabriel descended with the
revelation to Prophet Mohammad. Alnour is one of Makkah’s
mountains (Faran) mentioned
in the Torah, chapter23, verse
number 2
The Cave of Hira
The Cave of Hira is situated at the peak of «Jabal
an-Noor» to the East of Makkah. It is about 4
kilometers away from the Haram and its peak is
about 634 meters high

10. Masjid of the Dome of
the Rock: The rock is one of the
boulders adjacent to the Mosque
of al-Aqsa. The boulder itself is about 18 high and 13 meters wide. At present it is housed under a dome, known
as the ‘Dome of the
Rock’. This was built
by the Umayyad
Caliph, Abdul-Malik
bin Marwan and is
usually
confused
with the Mosque of
Al-Aqsa.

29

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

11. Masjid Aqsaa: The Mosque of al-Aqsa is situated on a sacred land,
chosen by God from the beginning of time. It has been rendered as such so
that the believers would glorify God. The Mosque of al-Aqsa is the second
place of worship that was established on the Earth. Abu Dhar () said:
I said, “O Messenger of Allah, what is the first Masjid placed on the earth?”
He said: “Masjid Haraam”. I then asked: “What is the second Masjid?”
He said “Masjid al-Aqsaa”. I asked: “What is the time period between the
placements of these two Mosques?” He said: “Forty years, and wherever
you have to pray, perform the prayer, since the Earth has been made a
place of prayer.” (Muslim)
When Prophet Adam () built the Ka’bah, God ordered him to go to where
the Mosque of al-Aqsa stands today. He ordered him to build the Mosque
and to worship God
there. This was the very
first place of worship to
be built in that region.
After Prophet Adam
(), Prophet Solomon () restored the
Mosque and expanded
it. Prophet Muhammad
() said:
“After Solomon, son of David, finished building Masjid al-Aqsaa, he asked
Allah to bestow him a Rule and Kingdom like no one had before which was
not befitting to anyone afterwards. Also that no one would come to this
Masjid seeking to pray in it, except that he would return from it sin-free.” The
Prophet () said: “As for two (of the three requests) he was granted, and I
hope that he will be granted the third.” (Ibn Khuzaimah)
It is the first of the two Qiblahs (direction of prayer) the Prophet () faced
in his prayers and the Muslims prayed towards it before they were ordered
to pray facing the Ka’bah. During the Night Journey, he stopped at Masjid
al-Aqsa, and from there he ascended to the Heavens. He led the prophets
in prayer during this night journey. It is the third Haram (sacred sanctuary),
after Makkah and Madinah.
30

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Islam and Wealth
In Islam, all wealth is the possession of Allah with which humans are
entrusted. It is a responsibility which must be earned through permissible
means and spent in permissible ways, such as spending on one’s self and
those for whom he is responsible for, without extravagance or waste. The
Messenger of Allah, Muhammad () said:
“A slave will not be able to take a step further on the Day of Requital until
he is taken to account for [the following things]: his time and how he spent it,
his knowledge and how he used it, his money and how he earned and spent
it, and his youth and how he used it.” (Tirmidhi)
It must also be spent in good ways. Allah () says:
Righteousness is not that you turn your faces toward the east or the
west, but [true] righteousness is [in] one who believes in Allah, the
Last Day, the Angels, the Book, and the prophets and gives wealth, in
spite of love for it, to relatives, orphans, the needy, the traveller, those
who ask [for help], and for freeing slaves.”  (2:177)

31

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Islam and Women
In Islam, men and women are different from each other and each has
their respective roles. Honoring and respecting women in Islam is a sign of
a good, wholesome character and an unadulterated nature. The Messenger
of Allah, Muhammad () said:
“The best of you are the best of you towards their wives.” (Tirmidhi)
The woman is also the first person to whom a man must act righteously,
maintain ties with, and treat well. When a man asked the Messenger of
Allah, Muhammad () to whom he should show the best companionship,
he replied:
“Your mother.” He said, “Then who?” He said, “Your mother.” He said,
“Then who?” He said, “Your mother.” He said, “Then who?” He said, “Your
father.” (Bukhari)
The Messenger of Allah, Muhammad () said:
“Women are the twin halves of men.” (Abu Dawud)

• Women are equal to men in their humanity. They are not the source of sin
nor are they the reason Adam () was expelled from Jannah (Heavenly
Gardens).

• Women are equal to men in their
individuality. They neither lose their
names nor the names of their
family upon marriage. They do
not fade away and blend into
the identity of men.

• Women are equal to men

with regards to reward and
punishment in this life as well
as the next.

32

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

• Women are equal to men in that Islam seeks to maintain and uphold their
honor and chastity.

• Women are equal to men in that they have a right to inheritance, as do
men.

• Women are equal to men in that they have full rights to do as they please
with their own wealth.

• Women are equal to men with regards to the obligation of shouldering the
responsibility of social reform.

• Women are equal to men in their right to receive an education and proper
upbringing.

• Woman and man have an equal share of rights in matters pertaining

to good rearing, proper teaching and caring. Islam assures that when
applying these rights of women they would be put at a higher position.

• Women have the right to provisions from her husband for all her needs

and more. If she’s not married then she has the right to provisions from
her brother(s). If she doesn’t have brothers then the closest of kin to
her.

• A woman has the right to keep all of her own money. She is not responsible
for maintaining the family financially.

• Women have the right to get sexual satisfaction from her husband.
• A woman has the right to get custody of her children in case of divorce
unless she is unable to raise them for a valid reason.

• Women have the right to re-marry after divorce or after becoming a
widow.

The Prophet of Allah () said:
“Whoever has three daughters or three sisters, and fears Allah in their
guardianship, will be together with me in Paradise like this.” He indicated
this by joining index and second fingers together. (Ahmad and others)
33

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Islamic Perspective on Sexual Relations
Islam considers sexual relations an essential human need
which need not be suppressed, rather satisfied in a proper
manner. It is not something looked down upon disdainfully and
a thing a person must refrain from.
Islam has set certain laws by which it is controlled and through
which one can satisfy this need. One is not to satisfy this need in
an animalistic or lustful uncontrolled manner; it should be satisfied through marriage.
The ultimate goal of marriage in Islam is to achieve
psychological and emotional stability for both spouses.
Allah () says:
They are Libas (i.e. body cover, or screen or Sakan
[i.e. you enjoy the pleasure of living with them]) for you
and you are the same for them. (2:187)
Islam safeguards the individual and society by forbidding everything which excites the sexual desire for fear
that a person would commit fornication or sodomy or rape.
This of course would result in the proliferation of illegitimate children who have no parents to raise them morally. They
would then emerge in society as a group who harbor animosity
and hate towards others. Also, diseases would spread throughout society.
Allah () says:
And come not near to the unlawful sexual intercourse.
Verily it is a Fahishah [a great sin and an evil way that leads one
to Hell]. (17:32)

34

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Islam and Non-Muslims
Islam protects the blood, wealth and honor of non-Muslims who have a
pact with an Islamic nation. They may not be oppressed nor transgressed
against; they may not be deprived of their rights nor ill-treated in
dealings.
Allah () says:
Allah does not forbid you from those who do not fight
you because of religion and do not expel you from your
homes from being righteous toward them and acting justly
toward them. Indeed, Allah loves those who act justly.
(60:8)
The Messenger of Allah, Muhammad () said:
“Indeed whoever oppresses one with whom we have
a pact, deprives him of his rights, burdens him with
more than he can bear, or takes something from him
without his consent, then I will dispute with him on
the Day of Requital.” He then pointed with his finger
to his chest. “Indeed whoever kills one with whom we
have a pact, who is under the responsibility of Allah and
His Messenger, Allah will forbid him from smelling the
fragrance of Jannah (Heavenly Gardens), and indeed
the fragrance of Jannah may be perceived from a distance of
seventy years.” (Baihaqi)
The Messenger of Allah, Muhammad () said:
“My Lord has commanded me that we should not oppress the
ones whom we have a pact with (ie non-Muslims who reside
in the lands of the muslims) or anyone else. ” (Baihaqi)

35

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Islam and Other Divine Religions
Islam deems it compulsory upon its followers to believe in the previous
divine Messages and in all the Prophets and Messengers. Muslims must
love them all, and respect them.
Allah () says:
And that was Our [conclusive] argument which We gave Abraham
against his people. We raise by degrees whom We will. Indeed, your
Lord is Wise and Knowing. And We gave to him [i.e. Abraham] Isaac
and Jacob – all [of them] We guided. And Noah, We guided before;
and among his descendants, David and Solomon and Job and Joseph
and Moses and Aaron. Thus do We reward the doers of good. And
Zechariah and John and Jesus and Elias – and all were of the righteous.
And Ishmael and Elisha and Jonah and Lot – and all [of them] We
preferred over the worlds. And [some] among their fathers and their
descendants and their brothers – and We chose them and We guided
them to a Straight Path.  (6:83-87)

• What the Qur’an says about Moses
Allah () says:
And mention in the Book, Moses. Indeed, he was chosen, and he was
a Messenger and a Prophet. (19:51)
Allah () says:
 O Moses, I have chosen you over the people with My messages and
My words [to you]. So take what I have given you and be among the
grateful. (7:144)
Allah () says:
Then We gave Moses the Scripture, making complete [Our favor] upon
the one who did good [i.e. Moses] and as a detailed explanation of all
things and as guidance and mercy that perhaps [the matter of] the
meeting with their Lord they would believe. (6:154)
36

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Allah () says:
And We certainly sent Moses with Our signs, [saying], "Bring out your
people from darkness into the light and remind them of the days of
Allah." Indeed in that are signs for everyone patient and grateful.
(14:5)

• What the Qur’an says about Jesus and his Mother, Mary, may Allah
praise them.

Allah () says:
And [mention] when the angels said, "O Maryam (Mary), indeed Allah
has chosen you and purified you and chosen you above the women of
the worlds. (3:42)
Allah () says:
Indeed the example of Jesus to Allah is like that of Adam. He created
him from dust; then He said to him, "Be," and he was. (3:59)
Allah () says:
O People of the Scripture do not commit excess in your religion or
say about Allah except the truth. The Messiah, Jesus, the son of Mary,
was but a messenger of Allah and His word which He directed to Mary
and a soul [created at a command] from Him. So believe in Allah and
His messengers. And do not say, "Three"; desist – it is better for you.
Indeed, Allah is but one God. Exalted is He above having a son. To Him
belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. And
sufficient is Allah as Disposer of affairs. (4:171)

37

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Muslims love Isa (Jesus) and his Mother
Isa peace be upon him was explicitly mentioned in the Holy Qur’an on
sixteen different occasions. On one occasion Allah the Exalted said in Surat
Al-Maidah, verse 110:
(Remember) when Allah will say (on the day of resurrection). ”O Isa
(Jesus), son of Mary! Remember my favor to you and to your mother
when I supported your with ruhu-lqudus [Jibrail (Gabriel)] so that you
spoke to the people in the cradle and in maturity; and when I taught
you writing, Al-Hikmah (the power of understanding), the Torah and
the Gospel; and when you made out of the clay, a figure like that of
a bird, by my permission, and you breathed into it, and it became
a bird by my permission, and you healed those born blind, and the
lepers by my permission, and when you brought forth the dead by
my permission; and when I restrained the children of Israel from you
(when they resolved to kill you) as you came unto them with clear
proofs and the disbelievers among them said: ”This is nothing but
evident magic”
On the other hand, Prophet Mohammad (peace be upon him) was
explicitly mentioned in the Holy Qur’an four times while the Virgin Mary
(peace be upon her), the mother of Jesus was mentioned eight times and
has a complete Sura (chapter) named after her.
On one occasion Allah the All Mighty said in Surat Al- Imran, verse 145:
(Remember) when the angles said: “ Oh Mary! Verily, Allah gives
you the glad tidings of a word [“Be!”- and he was! i.e. Jesus the son of
Mary] From him his name will be the Messiah Jesus the son of Mary,
held in honor in this world and in the hereafter, and will be one of those
who is near to Allah. 
As a family they have been mentioned in the Holy Qur’an three times and
they have been privileged by having a complete Sura (chapter) named after
them (Ali Imran) which is imprinted in the hearts and minds of the believers
forever.

38

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Islam and Jihad
One of the most misunderstood terms in Islam is Jihad. Unfortunately the
word ‘jihad’ has been misused and as a result many people associate it
with war and terrorism. Linguistically, Jihad means to strive in a certain
matter. Its general, its meaning signifies resisting and opposing evil
desires, oppression, persecution or standing up to
a tyrant.
Jihad can also denote military effort. This is seen as
a last attempt to end the violation of rights of others or
any act of aggression. Even during times of war Muslims
are commanded to uphold morality. Acts of torture are
strictly forbidden. Hurting civilians, women, children and
the elderly during times of war are also strictly forbidden.
The Messenger of God () said:
“Fight in the name of God, and for the cause of
God. Do not break treaties, do not mutilate the
dead and do not kill young children.” (Muslim)
Islam also prohibits the destroying or desecrating of places of worship, killing or hurting animals
and destroying trees.
At the time of fighting between Muslims and nonMuslims, Abu Bakr, the First Caliph after the Prophet,
would advise his commanders saying:
“I command you with ten things. Learn them by heart! Do
not betray the trust. Do not steal the spoils of war, or break
treaties. Do not mutilate the deceased or kill women. Do
not kill young children or the elderly. Do not uproot or
burn palm trees. Do not cut down fruitful trees or slaughter
sheep, cows or camels except for your consumption. You will
come across people secluded in monasteries, so leave them and what
they are devoted to.” (Tabari Vol. 3)
As for wars which are intended to increase one’s worldly possessions,
39

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

demonstrate one’s military might, and those waged for revenge, they are
forbidden in Islam.
The Prophet () said:
“The Mujahid1 is the one who struggles to perfect themselves by adhering
to the teachings of Islam.” (Ibn Hibban)
Other forms of Jihad include:
1. Conveying the Message of Islam to non-Muslims and being patient and
forbearing when delivering this message. Allah says: So do not obey the
disbelievers, and strive against them with the Qur’an a great striving.
(25:52)
2. Ordering with the good and forbidding the evil. This is the path of all
Prophets and Messengers and those who follow them in truth.
The Prophet () said:
“Every Prophet before me had amongst his people helpers and companions
who upheld the divine teachings. After them, there came a generation of
people who would speak and not hold true to what they said. Whoever
struggles (i.e. wages a Jihad) against them physically is a believer. Whoever
refutes what they said is a believer and whoever abhors what they have
done in his heart, is a believer.” (Muslim)
3. Being kind to people and making them happy and being patient with
them is a form of Jihad. The Prophet () said:
“The one who takes care of a widow or a poor or needy is like a Mujahid in
the path of Allah, or like one who fasts the days and prays throughout the
nights.” (Bukhari)
4. Teaching beneficial knowledge is as well a form of Jihad. The Prophet
() said:
“Whoever comes to my Masjid (i.e. in Madinah) and he has only come to it
to learn or teach a good thing, he would be in the rank of a Mujahid in the
path of Allah.”
1

A descriptive term used to describe those who practice Jihad.
40

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

5. Saying words of truth is a form of Jihad. The Prophet () said:
“The best form of Jihad is a word of truth that is said in the face of a tyrant.”
(Abu Dawood)
6. Obeying one’s parents is a form of Jihad. The Prophet () said to a man
who came to him seeking to combat the enemies:
“Are your parents alive?” He said: “Yes”, so the Prophet () said: “Your
Jihad is with them (i.e. to take care of them).”
7. Performing Hajj and Umrah (the greater and minor pilgrimage) are forms
of Jihad. The Prophet () said:
“Performing the Hajj is Jihad and the Umrah is a supererogatory act.”
8. Performing prayers in the Mosque is a form of Jihad. The Prophet ()
said:
“Going to the Mosques to perform prayers is Jihad in the path of Allah.”
(Tabrani)
All good deeds fall under this form of Jihad. A Muslim must always try their
best to strive to become better.

41

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Islam is the Faith of Peace
Islam means to submit to Allaah, adhere to obeying Him, and be free from
worshipping any others besides Allaah. There is no good except that which
Islam ordered for it to be done, and there is no evil except that which it
prohibited. Applying Islam guarantees everyone to be able to live in security
and peace in light of its system, which safeguards rights for all. Allaah ()
said:
Say, “Come, I will recite what your Lord has prohibited to you. He
commands that you not associate anything with Him, and to parents,
good treatment, and do not kill your children out of poverty; We will
provide for you and them; and do not approach immoralities- what
is apparent of them and what is concealed; and do not kill the soul
which Allah has forbidden to be killed except by legal right. This has
He instructed you that you may use reason;” and do not approach
the orphan’s property except in a way that is best until he reaches
maturity; and give full measure and weight in justice. We do not
charge any soul except with that within its capacity; and when you
speak be just, even if it concerns a near relative; and the Covenant
of Allah fulfill. This has He instructed you that you may remember.
(6:151 - 152)
Allah () also said:
Indeed, Allah orders justice and good conduct and giving to
relatives and forbids immorality and bad conduct and oppression. He
admonishes you that perhaps you will be reminded. (16: 90)
Hence, the Faith of Islam is a comprehensive Faith of peace in all meanings
of this word. This applies to the internal level of Muslim society as Allah ()
said:
And those who harm believing men and believing women for
something other than what they have earned have certainly born upon
themselves a slander and manifest sin. (33: 58)

42

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

The one upon whom be Allah’s Blessing and Peace said:
“A Muslim is a person whose tongue and hand is safeguarded against,
and an emigrant is a person who has left that which Allaah prohibited!.”
(Agreed upon)
He also said:
“A believer is a person whom people trust!”
Islam also provides peace on an international level established through
friendly relationships that are founded on security, stability and the foundations
of Islam. Moreover, a Muslim society does not transgress against another
society, especially those that are sincere in Faith, nor set up enmity against
its adherents. According to the words of Allah ():
O you who have believed, enter into Islam completely and perfectly
and do not follow the footsteps of Shayttaan. Indeed, he is to you a
clear enemy. (2: 208)
The Faith of Islam enjoins justice and non-oppression, even with those
who set up enmity against them. Allah () said:
O you who have believed, be persistently standing firm for Allah,
witnesses in Justice, and do not let the hatred of a people prevent you
from being just. Be just; that is nearer to Righteousness; and fear
Allah; indeed, Allah is Acquainted with what you do. (5: 8)
As-Salaam, The Peaceful, one of the All Praised’s Names () has said:
He is Allah, other than whom there is no deity, the Sovereign, the
Pure, the Perfection, the Bestower of Faith, the Overseer, the Exalted
in Might, the Compeller, the Superior. Exalted is Allah above whatever
they associate with Him. (59: 23)
As-Salam, is one of the names of Paradise. Allah the Most High said:
For them will be the Home of Peace with their Lord, and He will be
their protecting Friend because of what they used to do. (6: 127)

43

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

As-Salam is the greeting of the people of Paradise. Allah () said:
Their greeting the Day they meet Him will be, ‘Peace,’ and He has
prepared for them a noble Reward. (33: 44)
As-Salam is also the greeting of Muslims among themselves, AsSalaamu ‘Alaykum! It is a greeting which adds tranquility, calmness
and ease for the greeting and the greeted person. This is because
of the expression of security and safety within this greeting. This,
the Prophet () established as one of the perfecting actions of
a person’s belief. He said:
“You will not enter jannah until you believe, and you
will not believe until you love each other. Shall
I not guide you towards a thing, that if you do,
you would love each other? Spread the Salaam!
greeting among you!” (Reported by Muslim)
The one, upon whom be Allah’s Blessing
and Peace, established that this was one
of the best actions. This is because the
greeting brings hearts closer and softens
them when it is given or heard. It also
removes differences ands hatred. When the
Prophet () was asked, ‘ Which part of Islam is
best?,’ he replied,
“To feed people and give the Salam greeting to
those you know and those you do not know!” (Bukhari
and Muslim)
Hence, the Faith of Islam brought regulations and legislation
at times of war, marriage, economy, politics, worship, etc. It was
for an ideal, virtuous society to implement and regulate a Muslim’s
relationship with his/her Lord, society and surrounding world, whether
the human world or surrounding environment. The whole of humanity
is unable to produce the like of Islam. A Faith of this perfection and
comprehensiveness is deserving of being embraced, invited towards and
respected.
44

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Islam and Society
Islam commands that one’s environment must be cared for and protected
and forbids polluting it in any way. It does so through the following means:

• It encourages planting beneficial plants and trees. The Messenger of
Allah, Muhammad () said:

“No Muslim plants a tree or crop, and its fruit is eaten by birds, people, or
animals, except that it will be regarded as charity for him.” (Bukhari)

• It encourages the removal of anything that may inflict harm. The
Messenger of Islam () said:

“Removing harm from the path is charity.” (Bukhari)

• It encourages quarantining those afflicted with diseases and epidemics
in order to prevent its spread to other societies and protecting the lives of
others. The Messenger of Allah () said:

“If you hear of a plague in a certain location, then do not enter it, and if it
strikes a place where you are, then do not leave it.” (Bukhari)

• It forbids random killing of animals and birds. The Messenger of Allah,
Muhammad () said:

“Whoever kills a sparrow for no reason, it will cry to Allah on the Day of
Requital, ‘O Allah, so and so killed me without reason or benefit!’ ” (Nasa’i)

• It forbids polluting the society in any way. The Messenger of Allah,
Muhammad () said:

“Fear two things for which people curse others for.” [His Companions]
asked: “What are the two things for which people will curse others for, O
Messenger of Allah?” He replied: “That he relieves himself in places where
people walk or where they seek shade.” (Muslim)

45

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Islam and Cleanliness
Islam is a religion of cleanliness.
Allah () says:
O children of Adam, take your adornment at every Masjid, and eat and
drink, but do not waste: verily He does not love the wasteful. (7:31)
It is a religion of purity. Allah () says:
Indeed, Allah loves those who are constantly repentant and loves
those who purify themselves.  (2:222)

Figure: The ‘Court of the Lions’ in Alhambra Palace which was built in present day Spain,
known as Andalusia, was once ruled by Muslims.

Purity is a condition for prayer to be regarded as valid, and prayer is an act
of worship which a Muslim performs at least five times throughout his daily
routine. Islam also requires that one wash fully after ejaculation or sexual
intercourse, and highly encourages washing fully before performing those
types of worship which are manifest symbols of Islam, such as the Friday
Prayer and the Greater and Lesser Pilgrimage to Makkah.
46

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Allah says in the Glorious Qur’an:
O you who believe! When you rise up for prayer, wash your faces,
and your hands up to the elbows, and wipe your heads (with wet
hands), and (wash) your feet up to the ankles. And if you are in a
state of major ritual impurity [Janaaba], purify yourselves (by taking a
bath). And if you are sick or on a journey, or one of you comes from
the answering of call of nature, or you have had contact with women,
and you find no water, then go to clean earth and wipe your faces and
hands with some of it. Allah does not want to place you in difficulty,
but He wants to purify you and to perfect His grace upon you that you
may give thanks. (5:6)
Islam also encourages that one wash his hands prior and subsequent to
meals.The Messenger of Allah, Muhammad () said:
“Food is blessed when one washes his hands before and after it.”
(Tirmidhi)
It encourages that one keep his mouth and teeth clean. The Messenger
of Allah () said:
“Had I not found it difficult for my followers, I would have ordered them to
cleanse their teeth before every prayer.” (Bukhari)
It encourages that one cleanse and purify those places that
may become a breeding ground for germs and filth. The
Messenger of Allah, Muhammad () said:
“There are five acts which are from the innate nature with which Allah
created humans: circumcision, removing the pubic hair, plucking the hair of
the armpits, shortening the moustache, and clipping the nails.” (Bukhari)

47

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Islam and Knowledge
The religion of Islam encourages all people to seek and increase their
knowledge. It disparages and warns against ignorance. Allah () says:
Allah will exalt in degree those of you who believe and those who
have been granted knowledge. (58:11)
It regards striving to seek, learn, and teach knowledge as a means which
leads to Jannah. The Messenger of Allah, Muhammad () said:
“Whoever seeks a path in search of knowledge, Allah would make easy for
him a path leading to Jannah.” (Abu Dawud)
He forbade that knowledge be concealed, as it is an obligation for each
person to seek it. The Messenger of Allah, Muhammad () said:
“Whoever conceals knowledge would be muzzled on the Day of Resurrection
with a muzzle of Fire.” (Ibn Hibbaan)
Islam regards scholars with high
esteem and demands that they
be paid their due respect. The
Messenger of Allah, Muhammad ()
said:
“He is not from my followers, he who
does not respect his elders, who does
not show mercy to the young, and
does not give due right to a scholar.”
(Ahmad)

The Messenger, Muhammad ()
informed us of the status of the
scholar in his sayings:
“The excellence of a scholar over a
layman is like my excellence over the
least of you.” (Tirmidthi)

48

This picture depicts an aspect of modern
technology. Modern technology would not
have advanced the way it has had it not been
for Islamic culture.

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

The Effect of Islamic
Civilization on Modern Science
The one who contemplates the reason modern science and technology
have taken giant steps and advanced to the present state would certainly
agree that it is due to Islamic civilization which transmitted and introduced
vast amounts of knowledge and produced many scholars.
C.H. Haskins7 said: “The broad fact remains that the Arabs of Spain
were the principal source of the new learning for Western Europe.”
They are the ones who placed the fundamentals from which
modern civilization advanced. Whoever reviews the ‘Dictionary
of Technical Terms for Aerospace’ 8 would certainly conclude
that sixty percent of the known stars are given names that are
derived from Arabic.
The books and works of early Muslim scholars were
the main resource texts which the West benefited from,
especially the Europeans who used these works during
the Renaissance period. Many of these texts were used in
European universities.
Marquis of Dufferin and Ava
said:
“It is to Mussulman science, to
Mussulman art, and to Mussulman
literature that Europe has been in a
great measure indebted for its extrication
from the darkness of the Middle Ages.”9
This figure shows a twelfthcentury model of the solar
system from Baghdad

49

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Scientific knowledge that originated in India, China and the Hellenistic world was sought
out by Muslim scholars and then translated, refined, synthesized and augmented at
different centers of learning in the Islamic world from where the knowledge spread
to Western Europe. (History of Medicine, Arab roots of European Medicine, David W.
Tschanz, MSPH, PhD. Also see: www.hmc.org.qa/hmc/heartviews/H-V-v4%20N2/9.
htm). In addition, Muslim scholars also founded some unprecedented disciplines.
The Astrolabe: An important device invented by
Muslims for navigation. The points of the curved
spikes on the front rete plate, mark the positions
of the brightest stars. The name of each star
being labeled at the base of each spike. The
back plate, or mater is engraved with projected
coordinate lines. From the Whipple Museum of
the History of Science in Cambridge.

J.H. Denison said:
“In the fifth and sixth centuries the
civilized world stood on the verge of chaos.
The old emotional cultures that had made civilization possible, since they
had given to men a sense of unity and of reverence for their rulers, had
broken down and nothing had been found adequate to take their place. It
seemed then the great civilization which it had taken four thousand years to
construct was on the verge of disintegration, and that mankind was likely to
return to that condition of barbarism where every tribe and sect was against
the next, and law and order was unknown. The old tribal sanctions had
lost their power. The new sanctions created by Christianity were working
division and destruction instead of unity and order. It was a time fraught with
50

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

tragedy. Civilization, like a gigantic tree whose foliage had overarched the
world and whose branches had borne the golden fruits of art and science
and literature, stood tottering… rotted to the core. Was there any emotional
culture that could be brought in to gather mankind once more into unity and
to save civilization? It was among these people that the man, Muhammad
(), was born who was to unite the whole known world of the east and
south.”10
Muslims had advanced in all technical, scientific and intellectual fields.
Here we will mention a few of the outstanding scholars in various fields.

• Al-Khawarizmi (780-850CE) was a great scholar in the fields of
mathematics, algebra, logarithms and geometry. He was perhaps one of
the greatest mathematicians who ever lived. In fact, he was the founder
of several branches and basic concepts of mathematics. He was also the
founder of Algebra.

• Al-Biruni (973–1050AD) was a great scholar in many fields. He wrote on

topics ranging from astronomy to mathematics, mathematical geography to
mechanics, pharmacology and history. Al-Biruni discussed the theory of the
earth rotating on its own axis six hundred years before Galileo!
The German Orientalist E. Sachau said about Al-Biruni:
“He was the greatest intellectual known to man.”
As Muslims we say that the greatest intellectual known to man is our Prophet
Muhammad ().
In the field of medicine and pharmacy, Muslim scholars left behind a wealth
of knowledge in their works, which were used to advance modern day
medicine. Among these scholars were:

• Ibn Rushd (Averroes 1126-1198 CE) was an Andalusian (Spanish)

philosopher and physician, a master of philosophy and Islamic law,
mathematics and medicine.

• Ibn An-Nafees (1213-1288 CE) was a physician who was mostly famous

for being the first to describe the pulmonary circulation of the blood. He
discovered blood circulation before the Englishman Harvey and the Spaniard
Michael Servetus by hundreds of years.
51

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

• Ammaar son of Ali Al-Mosili son of Eesa Al-Kahhaal was highly skilled

in ophthalmology. He invented specialized instruments used in operations,
such as the “injection syringe”, a hollow needle.

• Al-Hasan son of Al-Haitham (Alhazen 965-1040 AH) was a great

mathematician. He was a pioneer in optics, engineering and astronomy.
According to Giambattista della Porta, Al-Hasan was the first to explain the
apparent increase in the size of the moon and sun when near the horizon.
His seven volume treatise on optics Kitab Al-Manadhir (Book of Optics) is
possibly the earliest work to use the scientific method. He used the results
of experiments to test theories.

• Al-Mansoori and Abu Bakr Ar-Razi were renowned, versatile

physicians. They made fundamental and enduring contributions to the fields
of medicine and philosophy.

• Muwaffaq Al-Baghdadi and Abul-Qasim Az-Zahrawi were

renowned in dental practices. They wrote books concerning this, and put
illustrative pictures of the tools used in surgical operations and how to use
the tools.

Eye anatomy - An image taken
from a book of an ancient Muslim
doctor .

52

Process of medicine extractionAn image taken from a book of
an ancient pharmacist .

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

In the field of geography and geology
many notable scholars can be
mentioned, among whom are:

• Shareef Al-Idrisi (1100-1165 AH) was

a cartographer, geographer and traveler.
He was renowned for his excellent maps
of the world. He also invented navigational
instruments.
There are many Muslim scholars who
participated and took part in advancing
civilization. Whoever wants to know more,
should review books that are written
specifically on this topic. Numerous times,
works of research written by Muslims were
plagiarized and wrongfully attributed to Blood circulation and the inner
organs of the human body . An
others.

Major Arthur Glyn Leonard said:
“Do not we, who now consider ourselves on the topmost pinnacle ever reached
by culture and civilization,
recognize that, had it not
been for the high culture,
the civilization and intellectual, as the social splendors
of the Arabs and soundness of their system, Europe would to this day have
remained sunk in the darkness of ignorance?”11

image taken from a book of an
ancient Muslim doctor.

The map of the world - An image taken from
a book of a Muslim scholar in geography .

53

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

The Virtues of Islamic Civilization

• Seeking knowledge is a religious duty, which Islam encourages Muslims
to fulfill.

• Muslim scholars in the past used their knowledge to strengthen people’s

belief in contrast to the scholars of this age, who use their knowledge to
weaken people’s belief.

• Muslim scholars in the past used their knowledge to serve mankind,

in contrast to most of the scholars today who use their knowledge for
exploitative and selfish ends.
Scientists during this era invented the atom and hydrogen bombs and
other weapons of mass destruction; thereafter they prevented others from
owning these weapons in an attempt to control and exploit the riches of
the world.

• Muslim scholars of the past spread their knowledge so that people could

benefit from it, in contrast to others who may withhold knowledge for
themselves or for their own country and prevent others from acquiring it.

• Muslim scholars of the past aimed to attain the Mercy of Allah and His

reward, in contrast to the scholars of today who try their best to benefit
materialistically from their discoveries.

54

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Scientific Points in a Few Verses of the Qur’an
Allah () says:
Verily, in the creation of the heavens and the earth, and in the
alternation of night and day, and the ships which sail through the sea
with that which is of use to mankind, and the water (rain) which Allah
sends down from the sky and makes the earth alive therewith after
its death, and the moving (living) creatures of all kinds that He has
scattered therein, and in the veering of winds and clouds which are
held between the sky and the earth, are indeed Ayat (proofs, evidences,
signs) for people of understanding. (2:164)

This picture depicts the galaxy containing our solar system

The Qur’an was revealed to Muhammad () who was unlettered; he
could neither read nor write. His people were generally unlettered as well.
Therefore, how can a man bring forth a Scripture which stunned the most
eloquent of people!

55

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Allah () says:
Say, “If mankind and the jinn were to be gathered in order to pr duce the like of this Qur’an, they could not produce the like of it, even
if they were to each other assistants.” (17:88)

Allah challenges all to bring forth something similar to the Qur’an. Keep in mind
that the shortest chapter in the Qur’an is only ten words long!

The Prophet () and many of his companions were destitute, and
he would recite to them verses from the Qur’an which have mention of
scientific facts. Over 1400 years after the Qur’an was revealed, modern
science discovered these very facts with advanced equipment!
Thomas Carlyle said:
“A false man found a religion? Why, a false man cannot build a brick
house! If he does not know and follow truly the properties of mortar, burnt
clay and what else he works in, it is no house that he makes, but a rubbish-heap. It will not stand for twelve centuries, to lodge a hundred and
eighty million; it will fall straightway.”12

56

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

The Qur'an and the Beginning of the World
Allah () says:
Allah (alone) orig nates the creation,
then He will repeat it,
then to Him you will
be returned. (30:11)
Allah clearly states in
this verse that He is the
One Who created and
brought into existence
all creatures in this
universe from nothing.
This is stated in the
Qur'an, which is divine
revelation from Allah.
Allah describes the beginning of the universe
saying:
The Originator of This is an actual picture of a star that has formed from
the heavens and the interstellar matter.
earth: and when He decrees a matter, He only says to it, “Be,” and it
is. (2:117)
Allah informs us in this verse that the universe was created from nothing,
all that took place before its creation is from the knowledge of the unseen
world, which only Allah knows. Human intellect is incapable of realizing and
grasping what the substance matter of the first creation was, for Allah did
not inform us of this knowledge. Humans can only produce hypothesis and
theories concerning ecological systems.
Allah () says: I did not make them witnesses of the creation of the
heavens and the earth, nor of the creation of their own selves; and I
would not have taken the misguiders as assistants. (18:51)

57

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Allah () says:
Have those who disb lieved not considered that
the heavens and the earth
were one single entity, which
We then parted asunder
and made from water every
living thing? Will they not,
then, believe? (21:30)
This picture shows that the universe is expanding.

This verse makes unmistakable reference to the fact that Allah created
the universe from a single entity, and He is All-Capable over all things. Allah
then ordered this ‘single entity’ to split, which it did, and turned into a cloud
of smoke. From this cloud of smoke Allah created the heavens and earth.
This is mentioned in the words of Allah:
Say, "Do you indeed disbelieve in He who created the earth in two
days and attribute to Him equals? “That is the Lord of the Worlds. And
He placed on it [i.e., the earth] firmly set mountains over its surface,
and He blessed it and determined therein its [creatures'] sustenance
in four days without distinction – for [the information of] those who
ask. Then He directed Himself to the heaven while it was smoke and
to it and the earth, “Come [into being], willingly or by compulsion.”
They said, “We have come willingly.” And He completed them as
seven heavens within two days and inspired [i.e. made known] in each
heaven its command. And We adorned the nearest heaven with lights
[i.e. stars for beauty] and as protection: such is the ordaining of the
Almighty, the All-Knowing (41:9-12)
This picture depicts our galaxy and the different planets.

58

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Modern astrophysicists assert that the entire universe originated from one
entity, the result of what is known today as the ‘Big Bang’.13
Allah () says:
Then He (rose over) the heavens while it was something like smoke, and
said to it and to the earth: ‘Come both of you willingly or unwillingly.’
They said, ‘We come willingly. (41:11)
This verse affirms that the sky, during its early stages was like smoke; this
is also affirmed by modern science.
James H. Jeans said: “We have found that, as Newton first conjectured,
a chaotic mass of gas of approximately uniform density and of very great
extent would be dynamically unstable; nuclei would tend to form in it, around
which the whole of matter would ultimately condense.”14

This picture depicts the actual aftermath of the explosion of a star
in the sky.

59

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Qur’an on the Expansion of the Universe
Allah () says: And We have built the heavens with Our own Hands;
and, verily, it is We who are steadily expanding it. (51:47)
Allah () says:
On that Day We shall roll up the skies as written scrolls are rolled up;
[and] as We brought into being the first creation, so We shall bring it
forth anew – a promise binding upon Us; for, behold, We are able to
do [all things]!! (21:104)
Allah () says:
On the day when this earth will be changed into another earth, as
shall be the heavens and they will all appear before Allah, the One, the
Most Supreme (14:48)
These verses confirm that the universe we live in is continuously expanding in space. If we go back in time, we would find that the entire universe
emerged from a primeval atom or cosmic egg. It then exploded by Allah’s
command and transformed into a cloud of smoke from which the earth and
heavens were formed. The universe is continuously expanding in space and
will finally stop expanding by Allah’s command. Thereafter the universe will
collapse upon itself and fuse once more into a primeval atom. The explosion and formation will once more occur, and a heaven, unlike our heaven,
and an earth, unlike our earth, will be formed. At this stage, worldly life will
come to an end, and life of the Hereafter will commence. All these stages
are mentioned in the Qur’an. One finds that this topic which was discovered through modern science has been mentioned in the Qur’an which was
revealed 1400 years ago! This alone affirms the fact that the Qur’an can
only be the Words of Allah and that Muhammad () received divine revelation and taught people these facts at a time when no one knew these facts.
These facts were not known to man except after many centuries.
Astronomers have discovered that the universe is in continuous motion,
and that it is expanding. This was discovered by studying the galaxies
60

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

and distant celestial bodies. The American astronomer Vesto M. Slipher,
who studied the spectra of galaxies, noticed that the spectral lines of a
few nearby systems were shifted toward longer wavelengths. This shift in
wave-length showed that most galaxies were receding from the Milky Way
at several hundred kilometers per second! 15

This picture shows that the distances between galaxies or clusters of galaxies are
continuously increasing and that therefore the universe is expanding

The American astronomer Edwin Hubble confirmed that the universe was
expanding and that the more remote the galaxy the higher was its recession
velocity; and that its recession velocity was proportional to its distance.16
With this we see that scholars in astronomy have affirmed that the universe
is ever expanding. This expansion will continue until gravity loses its pull
and the planets will spread out in the universe, which will result in the end
of the world.
Allah () says:
When the sky breaks apart, and when the stars are scattered.
(82:1-2)

61

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Qur’an on Celestial Bodies
Allah () says:
Allah is He Who raised the heavens without any pillars that you can
see. (13:2)
Modern day studies of the universe affirm that there is great energy in
matter, its components and celestial bodies. Allah can destroy it and recreate
it. Scientists have discovered different forms of powerful energy which flow
in the heavens and earth. These energies are:

• Strong nuclear energy: This energy holds subatomic particles together;
which includes protons, electrons and neutrons.

This nuclear energy causes certain forms of
• Weak nucleon energy:
17
radioactive decay.

• Electromagnetic energy: This is the energy which ties the atoms together
within matter, and which also gives each its respective traits.

• Gravity: It is the weakest form of energy known to us, but in the long run,
is a focal form of energy, since it keeps all the celestial bodies in their
respective positions.18

Allah() says:
And it is He Who has created the night and the day and the sun and the
moon – all of them floating through space (in their orbits). (21:33)
Allah() says:
And the sun runs in a fixed course of for a term (appointed). That is
the Decree of the All-Mighty, the All-Knowing. And the moon, for which
We have determined phases [which it must traverse] till it becomes like
an old dried curved date stalk. And neither may the sun overtake the
moon, nor can the night usurp the time of the day. They all float, each
in an orbit. (36:38-40)
In these verses Allah states that the sun is traveling towards a certain
direction. Previously, it was perceived that the sun was motionless. Modern
62

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

day cosmologists and astronomers have affirmed that the sun moves in a
certain direction. All planets in this solar system move, like satellites. The
Earth’s orbit is concentric to the orbits of the planets.

The Whirlpool Galaxy (also known as Messier 51, M51, or NGC 5194) is an interacting
grand-design spiral galaxy located at a distance of approximately 23 million light years in
the constellation.

Allah () says:
By the heaven full of starry paths. (51:7)
In Arabic the word ‘Hubuk’ (i.e. starry paths) has more than one
meaning:

• Perfection in creation: Astronomers calculate that there are two hundred

billion galaxies in the universe (known to man) and about seventy billion
trillion stars.19 Each galaxy varies in its size, shape, density, speed at
which it is traveling on its axis, its distance from us, and the distance each
is from the other, the stages it went through, its number of stars, and the
life of each of their stars.
63

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

• It also refers to a thing which is perfectly combined and integrated. These

awesome numbers of galaxies and stars in the known portion of the
universe is only 10% of the entire universe. There must be a power which
keeps it all together, otherwise it would collapse and fall into chaos. Far
removed is Allah from every imperfection, Who said:

Indeed, Allah holds the heavens and the earth, lest they deviate
from their orbits. And if they should ever deviate from their orbits, no
one could hold them [in place] after Him. Indeed, He is Forbearing and
forgiving. (35:41)

• It also refers to the orbits each celestial body floats in: among the amazing
thing which has baffled scientists is the vast number of galaxies in the
known portion of the universe. This proves that this universe is running
in a perfect system.

Allah () says: It is He who made the sun a [source] of radiant light
and the moon a light [reflected], and has determined for it phases so
that you may know the number of years and to measure time. Allah
has not created this except in truth. He details the signs for a people
who know. (10:5)
The perfect distinction made between light given off by a luminous, fiery
body and light reflected from the sun by a dark, cold body (i.e. the moon),
which is then reflected in a constant and steady manner (upon the earth)
has been mentioned in the Qur’an over fourteen hundred years ago! This
proves that Qur’an is Divine Revelation from Allah, Who is the Best Knower
of that which He, alone, has created.

64

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Qur’an on Air Pressure
Allah  says:
And whomsoever Allah wills to guide, He opens his breast to Islam,
and whomsoever He wills to send astray, He makes his breast
closed and constricted, as if he is climbing up to the sky.
Thus Allah puts the wrath on those who believe not. (6:125)
It can be concluded from this verse that the more one ascends
into the atmosphere the harder it is for him to breathe. This
is due to the reduction in pressure and low oxygen levels.
This matter cannot be proven by anyone unless the person
ascends up into the sky! This fact was discovered only after
humans learned how to fly and reach heights.
When a person ascends into the sky beyond eight kilometers
above sea level he/she would encounter breathing problems due
to the lack of oxygen and low air pressure. A problem frequently encountered is hypoxia, which is a low amount of oxygen reaching body tissues.
Another problem one may encounter is dysbarism, which is a complex
of symptoms resulting
from exposure to
excessively low or
rapidly changing air
pressure.20These two
problems would interfere with the normal body functions;
therefore, the difficulty in breathing at
high elevations can
be explained simply
as steps taken by the
body to protect itself.

Astronauts wear special protective gear to enable them to
breathe at high altitudes.

65

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Qur’an on the Darkness and upper Levels of Space
Allah () says: And even if We had
opened to them a gateway to heaven and
they had ascended, on and on, up to it,
they would surely say (in the evening):
"Our eyes have been (as if) dazzled (we
have not seen any angel or heaven). Nay,
we are a people bewitched! (15:14)
This similitude is amazing since it presents a universal fact which humans previously were ignorant of, and only discovered
during the age of space exploration in the
sixties. The entire universe is engulfed in
darkness. Light visible on earth is observed
This is a picture of the sun during
for two hundred kilometers, beyond that, the
an eclipse, which proves that the
universe is engulfed in darkness.
sun appears as a blue disc. Darkness is to
be witnessed in every direction, due to the rarity of water vapor and dust
particles. Far removed is Allah from every imperfection. It is He Who informed us of this reality.

Illustrates the thinness of the day layer opposite to the sun with the thickness of two
hundred kilometers. While the rest of the earth is observed in total darkness.

66

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Qur’an on the Atom
Allah () says:
And nothing is hidden from your Lord (so
much as) the weight of an atom on the earth
or in the heaven. Nor (is there) what is less
than that or what is greater than that but is
(written) in a Clear Record. (10:61)
In this beautiful verse Allah clarifies that nothing is hidden from Him in
this universe, no matter how minute it may be. It was believed that the atom
was the smallest entity in the universe. After it was split smaller entities
were discovered having positive electrical properties, such as protons and
negative electrical properties, such as electrons.
In 1939, the German scholars Hahn and Strassmann at the University of
Berlin split a uranium atom. With further research, particles which are even
more minute may be discovered.
Modern sciences have reached a high level of technical development and
scientific advancement in various fields of life. The future still awaits further
development. This process will continue until the day of Requital. The
collective efforts of all humankind in fields of knowledge will never measure
up to or even come close to Allah’s Knowledge and Ability.
Allah the Exalted says:
They ask you (O Muhammed) concerning the Ruh (Spirit of
inspiration). Say :”The Ruh (the Spirit) is one of the things, the
knowledge of which is only with my Lord. And of knowledge, you
(mankind) have been given only a little. (17:85)
The knowledge of Allah and his abilities are boundless and unmatchable.
Allah in this Quranic verse has laid out a simple explanation for us so that
our minds will be able to recognize and absorb the huge difference between
his knowledge and ours. Glory be to Allah!

67

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Qur’an on Human Embryonic Phases
Allah () says regarding the stages the fetus goes through:
And indeed We created man (Adam) out of an extract of clay (water
and earth). Thereafter We made him (the offspring of Adam) as a Nutfah
(mixed drops of the male and female sexual discharge) (and lodged it)
in a safe lodging (womb of the woman). Then We made the Nutfah into
a clot (a piece of thick coagulated blood), then We made the clot into
a little lump of flesh, then We made out of that lump of flesh bones,
then We clothed the bones with flesh, and then We brought it forth as
another creation. So blessed be Allah, the Best of creators. After that,
surely, you will die. Then [again], surely, you will be resurrected on the
Day of Resurrection. (23:12-14)

The stages a human passes through are:

• Extract of Clay: Adam () the father of humankind, was created from
clay. This verse does not agree with the theory of evolution which science
disproves. This indicates that humans are a distinct creation. Humankind
did not evolve from other species.

• Mixed sperm: In this stage male and female discharge mix in the womb,
the result of which the egg may become fertilized or die by the will of
Allah. If the egg becomes fertilized the first stages of creation would
commence. Allah () says:

68

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Indeed, We created man from a sperm-drop mixture that We may try
him; and We made him hearing and seeing. (76:2)
Meiotic spindle

Zona pellucida
Corona radiata

Secondary oocyte

First polar body

Diagram illustrating fertilization, the procession of events beginning when the sperm
contacts the secondary oocyte’s plasma membrane and ending with the intermingling
of maternal and paternal chromosomes at metaphase of the first mitotic division of
the zygote. A, secondary oocyte surrounded by several sperms, two of which have
penetrated the corona radiate. (Taken from Dr. Keith Moore, The Developing Human,
pg. 34 – 7th edition)

If the sperm fails to fertilize the ovum, it is cast out of the womb along
with it, but if it fertilizes the egg and creates a zygote, it clings to the side of
the womb in the form of a blastula. If Allah wills that it clings to the womb, it
moves onto the Alaqah stage (i.e. a leech like, suspending thing).
Allah () says:
O people, if you should be in doubt about the Resurrection, then
[consider that] indeed, We created you from dust, then from a spermdrop, then from a clinging clot, and then from a lump of flesh, formed
and unformed – that We may show you. And We settle in the wombs
whom We will for a specified term, then We bring you out as a child,
and then [We develop you] that you may reach your [time of] maturity.
And among you is he who is taken in [early] death, and among you is
he who is returned to the most decrepit [old] age so that he knows,
after [once having] knowledge, nothing. And you see the earth barren,
but when We send down upon it rain, it quivers and swells and grows
[something] of every beautiful kind. (22:5)
69

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

• Blood Clot/Clinging Thing: It is described as such, since it clings to the

womb; in a manner similar to a leech which feeds off the blood of other
creatures.

Lateral view of an embryo (24 to 25 days). B. Drawings illustrating the similarities
between a leech and a human embryo at the ‘Alaqah’ stage. (Taken from
Dr. Keith Moore, The Developing Human, pg. 71 – 7th edition)

70

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Diagram of the primordial cardiovascular system in an embryo of about 21 days, viewed
from the left side. Observe the transitory stage of paired symmetrical vessels. (Keith
Moore). Each heart tube continues dorsally into a dorsal aorta that passes caudally.
The external appearance of the embryo and its sacs is similar to that of a blood clot,
due to the presence of relatively large amounts of blood present in the embryo.

Cytotrophoblastic shell
Tertiary
chorionic villus
Intervillous space
Maternal blood

Maternal sinusoid

Section of an implanted embryo (about 21 days). In this diagram we can
see the suspension of an embryo during the ‘Alaqah’ stage in the womb
of the mother.

71

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

• Chewed substance: It is described as such since the embryo is similar
in appearance to a chewed substance.

Second pharyngeal
groove
Maxillary
prominence

Third pharyngeal
arch
Cervical sinus

Mandibular
prominence
Optic vesicle

Second pharyngeal
arch

Nasal placode
Stomodeum

Heart

Upper limb bud

Macrophotograph
of a stage 13, 4 1/2
week human embryo. (Keith Moore)
Actual size 4.5 mm

Tail-like caudal
eminence

Lower limb bud
Somites

Site of
Midbrain

The embryo in this stage is similar in
appearance to a chewed substance, Site of
because the somites at the back of the lens placode
embryo somewhat resemble teeth marks
Site of
nasal placode
in a chewed substance.

Gum

Left ventricual
prominence of heart

Umbilical cord
Caudal
eminence
Lower limb bud

1st, 2nd, 3rd and
4th pharyngeal
arches
Left atrial
prominence
of heart

Upper limb
bud
Somites
Mesonephric
prominence
Actual size 4.5 mm

Figure: Look at the similarities between a piece of chewed
gum and an actual photo of an embryo. How is it possible
that an unlettered man give such explicit details on the
embryo? Indeed it is but a revelation from God!

72

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

• Formation of bones.
• Covering of bones with flesh.
• Development of the embryo into a different form, wherein the
proportioning of the body takes place and life is breathed into it.

The human embryo goes through a number of stages within three
darknesses, as Allah () says:
He created you (all) from a single person (Adam); then made from him
his wife [Hawwa' (Eve)]. And He has sent down for you of cattle eight
pairs (of the sheep, two, male and female; of the goats, two, male and
female; of the oxen, two, male and female; and of the camels, two, male and
female). He creates you in the wombs of your mothers, creation after
creation in three veils of darkness, such is Allah your Lord. His is the
kingdom, Lâ ilâha illa Huwa (none has the right to be worshipped but He).
How then are you turned away? (39:6)
This verse states that the
embryo is covered in three
coverings, referred to as
“darknesses” in this verse.
Water, air, light and heat cannot
penetrate these coverings.
Nor can they be seen with the
naked eye.
Dr. Maurice Bucaille said:
‘Modern interpreters of the
Qur’an see in this verse the three
anatomical layers that protect
the infant during gestation:
the abdominal wall, the uterus
itself, and the surroundings of
the fetus (placenta, embryonic
membranes, amniotic fluid).’22

Maternal blood in
intervillous space
Umbilical cord

Chorionic villus
Spiral endometrial arteries
Decidua basalis
Chorionic plate

Amniochorionic
membrane

Amnion

Uterine cavity

21

Smooth chorion
Decidua parietalis

Mucous plug
Vagina

Drawing of a sagittal section of a gravid uterus
at 4 weeks showing the relation of the fetal
membranes to each other and to the deciduas
and embryo.

73

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

The embryo is also placed in a safe place. Allah () says:
Did We not create you from a liquid disdained? And We placed
it in a firm lodging [i.e. the womb] for a known extent [determined by
gestation]. And We determined [it], and excellent [are We] to determine.
(77:20-23)
Dr. Gary Miller:23 ‘A reporter asked Professor Keith Moore:24 “Don’t you
think that maybe the Arabs might have known about these things - the
description of the embryo, its appearance and how it changes and grows?
Maybe they were not scientists, but maybe they did some crude dissections on their own - carved up people and examined these things.”
The professor immediately pointed out to him that he [i.e., the reporter]
had missed a very important point. All of the slides of the embryo that had
been shown and had been projected in the film had come from pictures
taken through a microscope. He said, “It does not matter if someone had
tried to discover embryology fourteen centuries ago, they could not have
seen it!”
All of the descriptions in the Qur’an of the appearance of the embryo
are of the organism when it is still too small to see with the naked eye.
Therefore, one needs a microscope to see it. Since such a device had only
been around for little more than two hundred years, Dr. Moore taunted:
“Maybe fourteen centuries ago someone secretly had a microscope and
did this research, making no mistakes anywhere. Then he somehow taught
Muhammad and convinced him to put this information in his book. Then he
destroyed his equipment and kept it a secret forever. Do you believe that?
You really should not unless you bring some proof because it is such a
ridiculous theory.”
When he was asked: “How do you explain this information in the
Qur’an?”
Dr. Moore’s reply was: “It could only have been divinely revealed!”’
Dr. Gerald C. Goeringer25 said: “In most, if not all, instances, this
description antedates by many centuries the recording of the various stages
of human embryonic and fetal development recorded in the traditional
scientific literature.”

74

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

What is mentioned in the Qur’an about the Oceans
Qur’an on the Barrier Between the Seas
Allah () says:
And it is He Who has let free the two seas (kinds of water): this is
palatable and sweet, and that is salty and bitter; and He has set a
barrier and a complete partition between them.25:53( )
River

A.STRATIFIED

Weak tadal currents

1
5
20
30

River

Tides

River

Tides
There are three main salinity regimes in coastal waterways: stratified; partially
mixed and fully mixed.

The fact that the waters of the oceans do not mix with each other has only
been discovered lately by oceanographers. This is due to the physical force
called “surface tension”;26 therefore, waters of neighboring seas do not mix.
It is caused by the difference in the density of their waters; surface tension
prevents them from mingling with one another, just as if a thin wall were
between them. The Amazon River’s water pours into the Atlantic Ocean and
yet preserves its traits even after it goes out 200 meters into the ocean.
75

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Qur’an on Darkness in the Seas and Internal Waves:
Allah () says:
Or [the state of a disbeliever] is like the darkness in a vast deep sea,
overwhelmed with waves topped by waves, topped by dark clouds,
(layers of) darkness upon darkness: if a man stretches out his hand,
he can hardly see it! And he for whom Allah has not appointed light for
him there is no light.24:40( )
White Light
(all colors:but separated
for visualization)
Wavelength
(in mm)

Depth
(m)

100
200
300

This diagram shows the depth that light will penetrate in clear ocean water. Because red
light is absorbed strongly, it has the shallowest penetration depth, and blue light has the
deepest penetration depth. (Applied Optics, Vol. 20 (177) Smith, R.C. and K.S. Baker. 1981.
Also see: http://daac.gsfc.nasa.gov/oceancolor/scifocus/oceanColor/oceanblue.shtml )

It is well-known and affirmed scientifically that at extreme depths of the
ocean there is no light, only darkness. The cause for this is that sunrays
cannot reach it, for oceans range from being a few hundred meters deep to
being 11034 meters deep. The darkness in deep seas and oceans is found
around a depth of 200 meters and below. At this depth, there is almost no
light. Below a depth of 1000 meters there is no light at all. Therefore, most of
the sun’s rays are absorbed by the water at 100 meters. This portion of the
sea is known as the luminous portion. Thereafter 1% of the sun’s rays are
visible at 150 meters, and 0.01% of the rays at 200 meters.
76

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

The ozone layer in the atmosphere reflects most of the ultra-violet rays,
whereas the clouds reflect 30% and absorbs 19% of these rays. Only
51% of these rays reach the sea. Between 3% and 30 % of the sunlight is
reflected at the sea surface. Then almost all of the seven colors of the light
spectrum are absorbed one after another in the first 200 meters, except the
blue light.27

Qur’an on Internal Waves:
Scientists have recently discovered
that there are internal waves
which “occur on density interfaces
between layers of different
densities.”28 The internal waves
cover the deep waters of seas and
oceans because the deep waters
have a higher density than the
waters above them. Internal waves
act like surface waves. They can
also break, just like surface waves.
Internal waves cannot be seen by
the human eye, but they can be
detected by studying temperature
or salinity changes at a given
location.

Internal waves and scales of ocean mixing.
(Oceanography, Chris Garrett. Also see: http://
www.nature.com/nature/journal/v422/n6931/
full/422477a.html )
Internal waves at
interface between
two layers of water of
different densities.
One is dense (the lower
one), the other one is
less dense (the upper
one). (Oceanography,
Gross, p. 204)

77

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

For example, the Mediterranean Sea’s water is warm, saline, and less
dense, compared to the Atlantic Ocean’s water. When Mediterranean water
enters the Atlantic over the Gibraltar sill, it moves several hundred kilometers
into the Atlantic at a depth of about 1000 meters with its own warm, saline,
and less dense characteristics. The Mediterranean water stabilizes at this
depth. Although there are large waves, strong currents, and tides in these
seas, they do not mix or transgress this barrier.

The major water masses in the deep ocean are differentiated by their temperature and
salinity. These properties determine their relative densities, which in turn drive deep
thermohaline circulation of the oceans. NADW = North Atlantic Deep Water. AABW =
Antarctic Bottom Water. Modified from figure courtesy of Dr. Steve Hovan, Indiana
University of Pennsylvania.

This information has only been known to us in this age, with the advanced
technology and equipment available to view this. The Prophet () lived in a
desert climate far from the ocean, and he did not travel across any oceans.
The fact that the Qur’an mentions this phenomenon indicates the veracity
of the Qur’an.

78

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Qur’an on Formation of Clouds and Rain
Allah () says:
And it is He Who sends the winds as heralds of glad tidings, going
before His Mercy (rain). Till when they have carried a heavy-laden
cloud, We drive it to a land that is dead, then We cause water (rain)
to descend thereon. Then We produce every kind of fruit therewith.
Similarly, We shall raise up the dead, so that you may remember or
take heed. (7:57)
Allah () says:
And We send the winds fertilizing (to fill heavily the clouds with
water), then cause the water (rain) to descend from the sky, and We
give it to you to drink, and it is not you who are the owners of its stores
[i.e. to give water to whom you like or to withhold it from whom you
like]. (15:22)
Modern science has affirmed the scientific points mentioned in this verse
of the Qur’an. The winds carry water particles which are rich in salt up into
the atmosphere; these
An image of the atmosphere including its clouds and winds.
particles which are called
“aerosols”, function as
water traps and form
cloud drops by collecting
around the water vapor
themselves. The clouds
are formed from water
vapor that condenses
around the salt crystals
or dust particles in the
air. Because the water
droplets in these clouds
are very small (with a
diameter between 0.01
and 0.02 mm),
79

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

the clouds are suspended in the air, and spread across the sky.29 Thus, the
sky is covered in clouds. The water particles that surround salt crystals and
dust particles thicken and form raindrops, so drops that become heavier
than the air leave the clouds and start to fall to the ground as rain.
Allah () says:
See you not that Allah drives the clouds gently, then joins them
together, then makes them into a heap of layers, and you see the rain
comes forth from between them; and He sends down from the sky hail
(like) mountains, (or there are in the heaven mountains of hail from
where He sends down hail), and strikes therewith whom He wills, and
averts it from whom He wills. The vivid flash of its (clouds) lightening
nearly blinds the sight. (24:43)

A cumulonimbus cloud. This picture has been taken by NASA satellite. It is as though an
invisible hand is pushing the cumulus clouds to the place of convergence

80

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Rain clouds are formed and shaped according to definite systems and
stages. The formation stages of cumulonimbus, a type of rain cloud, are:

1st Stage

2nd Stage

3rd Stage

1st stage: Being Driven Along: Clouds are carried along, that is, they are
driven along, by the wind.
2nd stage: Joining: Then, small clouds (cumulus clouds) driven along by
the wind join together, forming a larger cloud.
3rd stage: Stacking: When the small clouds join together, updrafts within
the larger cloud increase. The updrafts near the centre of the cloud are
stronger than those near the edges. These updrafts cause the cloud body to
grow vertically so the cloud is stacked up. This vertical growth causes the
cloud body to stretch into cooler regions of the atmosphere, where drops of
water and hail formulate and begin to grow larger and larger. When these
drops of water and hail become too heavy for the updrafts to support them,
they begin to fall from the cloud as rain, hail, etc.
81

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

A cloud becomes electrified as hail falls through a region in the cloud of
super-cooled droplets and ice crystals. As liquid droplets collide with a
hailstone, they freeze on contact and release latent heat. This keeps the
surface of the hailstone warmer than that of the surrounding ice crystals.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Model for forked lighting. (a) The negative charge concentrated at the bottom of the cloud
becomes large enough to overcome the air’s resistance and develops a «leader» pointing
towards the ground. (b) An upward flow of positive charges form the ground concentrates
elevated points. (c) The downward flow of negative charges meets the upward flow of positive
charges and a strong electric current known as return stroke carries the positive charges into
the cloud.

When the hailstone comes in contact with an ice crystal, an important
phenomenon occurs. Electrons flow from the colder object toward the
warmer object. Hence, the hailstone becomes negatively charged. The
same effect occurs when super-cooled droplets come in contact with a
hailstone and tiny splinters of positively charged ice break off. These lighter
positively charged particles are then carried to the upper part of the cloud by
82

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

updrafts. The hail falls towards the bottom of the cloud, thus the lower part
of the cloud becomes negatively charged. These negative charges are then
discharged as lightning. We conclude from this that hail is the major factor
in producing lightning.30
Allah () says:
And thunder glorifies and praises Him, and so do the angels because
of His Awe. He sends the thunderbolts, and therewith He strikes whom
He wills, yet they (disbelievers) dispute about Allah. And He is Mighty
in strength and Severe in punishment. (13:13)

83

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Qur’an on Animals
Allah () says:
And verily! In the cattle, there is a lesson for you. We give you to
drink of that which is in their bodies, from between the undigested
food and blood, pure milk; palatable to the drinkers. (16:66)
Maurice Bucaille said:
“From a scientific point of view, physiological notions must be called
upon to grasp the meaning of this verse. The substances that ensure the
general nutrition of the body come from chemical transformations which
occur along the length of the digestive tract. These substances come from
the contents of the intestine. On arrival in the intestine at the appropriate
stage of chemical transformation, they pass through its wall and towards
the systemic circulation. This passage is effected in two ways: either
directly, by what are called the “lymphatic vessels”, or indirectly, by the
portal circulation. This conducts them first to the liver, where they undergo
alterations, and from here they then emerge to join the systemic circulation.
In this way everything passes through the bloodstream.
The constituents of milk are secreted by the mammary glands. These are
nourished, as it were, by the product of food digestion brought to them via
the bloodstream. Blood therefore plays the role of collector and conductor of
what has been extracted from food, and it brings nutrition to the mammary
glands, the producers of milk, as it does to any other organ.
Here the initial process which sets everything else in motion is the
bringing together of the contents of the intestine and blood at the level of the
intestinal wall itself. This very precise concept is the result of the discoveries
made in the chemistry and physiology of the digestive system. It was totally
unknown at the time of Prophet Muhammad () and has been understood
only in recent times. I consider that the existence in the Qur’an of the verse
referring to these concepts can have no human explanation on account of
the period in which they were formulated.”31

84

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Qur’an on Mountains
Allah () says:
Have We not made the earth as a bed, and the mountains as pegs?
(78:6-7)

Isostacy: mountain masses deflect a pendulum away from the vertical, but not as much as
might be expected. In the diagram, the vertical position is shown by (a) if the mountain were
simply a load resting on a uniform crust, it ought to be deflected to (c). However because it
has a deep ‘root’ of relatively non-dense rocks, the observed deflection is only to (b). Picture
courtesy of Building Planet Earth, Cattermole pg. 35

Scientists explain the importance of mountains as being pegs which
stabilize the earth saying:
“Mountains have underlying roots. These roots are deeply embedded in
the ground, thus, mountains have a shape like a peg. The earth’s crust is
thirty to sixty kilometers deep, this being known due to the seismograph.
Also, it is known due to this machine that every mountain has an underlying
root, which stabilizes the crust of the earth with the underlying layers, and
prevents the earth from shaking. Therefore, the mountain is similar to a nail,
which holds different pieces of wood together.”32

85

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

A picture which shows the ‘roots’ of a mountain. Some of these roots may extend sixty
kilometers into the earth.

Allah () says:
And He has affixed into the earth, mountains standing firm, lest it
should shake with you; and rivers and roads, that you may guide
yourselves. (16:15)
Modern science attests
to the fact that mountains
are distributed evenly and
perfectly on earth, which also
stabilize the earth, especially
those mountains which the
geologists call ‘Asymmetrical
Mountain Ranges’ which
are to be found in every
continent.33 How then could
an unlettered man, whose
nation was mostly unlettered,
know these facts?

86

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Water and Life
Allah () says:
Have not those who disbelieve known that the heavens and the
earth were joined together as one united piece, then We parted them?
And We have made from water every living thing. Will they not then
believe? (21:30)
Modern science affirms clearly that water is the basic component of life,
with which the cell is built. Chemists have proven that water is a necessary
and active substance used in changes and reactions which occur inside the
body. For this reason it is the only fluid which every living thing needs, no
matter how large or small it may be, starting with micro-organisms to the
largest living animals on earth.
The water which covers
the earth in this day and
age is approximately 71%
and the remainder 29% of
the earth is dry land.
The main source for
humans, animals and
plants is water. It is proven
by scientific analysis that
the body of a human adult
from the age of 15 years
and upwards contains
approximately 71% water.
As for a child, his/her
body contains 93% water. This indicates that 80% of water runs through
the human body and the remainder is blood, and as much as 90% water is
found in animals and plants.

87

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Who are those who show Enmity towards Islam?
If we look at the religions of the world, one realizes that Islam is a religion
loathed by many people. What is the reason for this open enmity? If we
scrutinize those who openly display their enmity towards Islam, we can
categorize them into one of the following categories:
1) Polytheists and ignorant people, as Islam is the religion of truth which
disallows worshipping and showing humility to anything other than Allah.
Allah () says:
Say, [O Muhammad] ‘Is it other than Allah that you order me to worship,
O ignorant ones? (39:64)
2) Those whose natural dispositions have become adulterated, as Islam is
a religion which agrees with the natural disposition of humans.
Allah () says:
So direct your face (self) toward the religion, inclining to truth. [Adhere
to] the natural innate state (Islamic Monotheism) in which Allah has
created all people. No change should there be in the creation of Allah
(by following other than that). That is the correct religion, but most of the
people do not know. (30:30)
3) Unjust people, as Islam is a religion of justice and equity.
Allah () says:
Indeed, Allah orders justice and good conduct and giving to
relatives and forbids immorality and bad conduct and oppression. He
admonishes you that perhaps you will be reminded. (16:90)
4) Those who seek to spread mischief and wrongdoing, as Islam is the
religion of righteousness and reform.
Allah () says:
…And they [the disbelievers] strive throughout the land [causing]
88

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

corruption, and Allah does not like corrupters. (5:64)
5) Transgressors, as Islam is the religion of peace.
Allah () says:
Fight in the way of Allah those who fight you but do not commit
aggression. Indeed, Allah does not like aggressors. (2:190)
6) The fanatics and extremists, as Islam is a moderate
religion.
Allah() says:
And thus we have made you a moderate
and just community that you will be
witnesses over the people and the
Messenger will be a witness over
you. (2:143)
7) People who have lustful
desires, as Islam is a religion of
chastity.
Allah () says:
And
do
not
approach
unlawful sexual intercourse
(by avoiding all situations
that might possibly lead to it).
Indeed, it is ever an immorality
and is evil as a way. (17:32)
8) Those who desire worldly life, as
Islam is a religion of mutual support and
mercy which fights exploitation of people’s
needs and weaknesses.

89

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Allah () says:
And do not consume one another’s wealth unjustly or send it [in
bribery] to the rulers in order that [they might aid] you [to] consume
a portion of the wealth of the people in sin, while you know [it is
unlawful]. (2:188)
9) Those who scorn and belittle humanity and deem
themselves a chosen race, as Islam is a religion
of equality which fights all forms of racism and
prejudice.
Allah () says:
O mankind, indeed We have created you
from male and female and made you
peoples and tribes that you may know one
another. Indeed, the most noble of you in
the Sight of Allah is the most righteous
of you. Indeed, Allah is Knowing and
Acquainted. (49:13)

D

ear reader, after having read this far,
I believe many of the notions that you
may have come across in the media about
Islam have already started to crumble and the
truth about Islam is becoming more apparent. Let
us note down for you the key qualities of Islam:
1. Islam is the religion of truth which disallows
worshipping and showing humility to anything other
than Allah. Allah, the Exalted, says:
Say [O Muhammad ()] ‘Is it other than Allah that you
order me to worship, O ignorant ones? (39:64)
2. Islam is a religion of peace that denounces all forms of injustice
and tyranny. Allah, the Exalted, says:
90

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Allah does not forbid you from those who do not fight you because of
religion and do not expel you from your homes - from being righteous
toward them and acting justly toward them. Indeed, Allah loves those
who act justly. (60:8)
3. Islam is a religion that encourages education and the spread of knowledge.
Allah, the Exalted, says:
Say, “Are those who know equal to those who do not know?” Only
they will remember [who are] people of understanding. (39:9)
4. Islam is a religion of purity and hygiene. Allah, the Exalted, says:
Indeed, Allah loves those who are constantly repentant and loves
those who purify themselves. (2:222)
5. Islam is a religion of justice and good conduct. Allah, the Exalted,

says: Indeed, Allah orders justice and good conduct and giving to
relatives and forbids immorality and bad conduct and oppression. He
admonishes you that perhaps you will be reminded. (16:90)
6. Islam is a religion of ease. Allah, the Exalted says:
Allah intends for you ease and does not intend for you hardship.
(2:185)
7. Islam is a religion of mercy. The Prophet () said:
“Those who are merciful will be shown mercy by God. Be merciful to those
on the Earth and God shall be merciful to you.”(Tirmidthi)
8. Islam is a religion of complete justice. Allah, the Exalted, says:
Do not let the hatred of a people prevent you from being just. Be just;
that is nearer to righteousness. (5:8)
9. Islam is a religion that calls for cooperation in goodness. Allah, the
Exalted, says:
And cooperate in righteousness and piety, but do not cooperate in
91

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

sin and aggression. (5:2)
10. Islam is not a religion for a select group, race or ethnicity. It is for
humankind at large. Allah, the Exalted, says:
And We have sent you comprehensively to mankind as a bringer
of good tidings and a warner. But most of the people do not know.
(3:103)
11. Islam is a religion that effaces all sin. Allah, the Exalted, says:
Say, ‘O My slaves who have transgressed against themselves [by
sinning], do not despair of the mercy of Allah. Indeed, Allah forgives
all sins. Indeed, it is He who is the Forgiving, the Merciful.’ (39:53)

92

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Distinguishing Qualities and Privileges of Islam
Since Islam is the last religion, it has distinguished qualities and
privileges which make it suitable for all times and places:

• It is the last Divine Religion revealed to man.
• Islam recognizes previous divine revelations. On the other hand, Jews do

not recognize Jesus, and the Christians do not recognize Muhammad ();
whereas Muslims recognize Moses, Jesus and all the prophets, may Allah
exalt their mention.

• In Islam, humans relate with their Lord in all matters and conditions.
• Islam is the only religion which has not been distorted or changed.
Harry G. Dorman said: “It (the Qur’an) is literal Revelation of God, dictated
to Muhammad by Gabriel, perfect in every letter. It is an ever-present miracle
witnessing to itself and to Muhammad, the Prophet of God. Its miraculous
quality resides partly in its style, so perfect and lofty that neither man nor
jinn could produce a single chapter to compare with its briefest chapter, and
partly in its content of teachings, prophecies about the future, and amazingly
accurate information such as the illiterate Muhammad could never have
gathered of his own accord.”34

• Islam is the religion which covers the material and spiritual aspects of

life. It does not neglect even the slightest of things in a Muslim’s life. AbdurRahman son of Zaid said that it was said to Salman: “Your Prophet has
taught you everything, even how to relieve yourselves? Salman said:
‘Of course, he forbade us to face the direction of the Qiblah while
defecating or urinating, or to clean oneself with his right hand, or to
use less than three stones, or to use bone or dung (to clean oneself).”
(Muslim)
W. Thomas Arnold said: “Sense of justice is one of the most wonderful
ideals of Islam, because as I read in the Qur’an I find those dynamic
principles of life, not mystic but practical ethics for the daily conduct of life
suited to the whole world.”
93

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

• Islam satisfies human bodily and spiritual needs in equilibrium. It refuses
to allow that one aspect be given precedence over the other.
Prince Charles said:
“Islam can teach us today a way of understanding and living in the world
which Christianity itself is poorer for having lost. Islam refuses to separate
man and nature, religion and science, mind and matter.”

This copy of the Quran written with liquid gold on papyrus indicates the Muslims
concern for preserving the Quran.

• Islam does not conflict with human intellect or natural disposition.
• Islam is the religion for humankind at large, regardless of their education,

time and place. This is in contrast to previous religions which were sent to
specific people at a specific time. For example, if a person wants to become
a Jew, he has to be born a Jew. Jesus () said about Christianity: ‘I was
sent to the lost sheep of the Children of Israel. Islam is a universal
religion that it is fit for all people at all times, regardless of their race or
language. It is the Word of God:
94

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

And We have not sent you except as a giver of glad tidings and a
warner to mankind. But most of the people do not know. (34:28)
In these verses God commands His Prophet () to openly call to Islam, so
he called his people to worship God alone, and to cast aside all false deities.
He was harmed by his people, yet he remained steadfast and merciful.
He sent letters to the Kings of his time and invited them to accept Islam.
Among those whom he wrote to were the Emperor of Rome, the Emperor
of Persia, and the King of Abyssinia. If the message of Prophet Muhammad
() was not a universal one, he would not have invited the rulers of different
kingdoms close to Arabia to accept Islam. This would possibly open more
than one front with adversaries who were well equipped and great in number.
Why would he venture to do something like this if it were not but a divine
Message from God which he was ordered to convey to mankind at large!

Translation :
From Muhammad, the Messenger
of Allah, To the Negus, King of
Abyssinia. Peace be upon him
who follows the Guidance. I am
grateful to Allah, there is no god
but Him, and I bear witness that
Jesus son of Mary was no more
than a spirit created by Him, and
His word (‘Be!’ - and he was)
which He bestowed on Mary,
the Virgin, the good, the pure,
so that she conceived Jesus.
Allah created Him as He created
Adam by His Hand. I call you to
worship Allah Alone, and not to
associate any partner with Him
and (I call you) to His obedience
and to follow me and to believe
in that which was revealed to me,
for I am the Messenger of Allah. I
invite you and your men to Allah,
the Exalted. I bear witness that I
have communicated my message.
I invite you to listen and accept my
advice. Peace be upon him who
follows true guidance.

95

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

The Messenger of Allah () said: ‘This matter (i.e. the religion of Islam) will
become apparent as night and day. Every person in a city or desert area will
come to know of this religion, by means of might or disgrace. Might by which
Islam is honored and disgrace by which God disgraces disbelief.’ (Ahmad)
Translation: I begin with the Name
of Allah, the Compassionate, the
Most Merciful. From Muhammad
ibn Abdu-llah the Messenger of
God to Muqawqas the Ruler of
the Christians in Egypt. Peace
be upon him who follows the
guidance. I call you to Islam.
Accept Islam and you will be safe.
God will give you your reward
double-fold. If you forsake the
message of God, you will carry
the sin of all your followers. Say:
“O People of the Book! Come
to common terms between us
and you: that we worship none
but Allah; that we associate no
partners with Him; that we erect
not, from among ourselves,
Lords and patrons other than
Allah. If then they turn back, say you: ‘Bear witness that we are Muslims (submitting to Allah’s
Will). (3:64)
Translation: I begin with the Name
of Allah, the Compassionate, the
Most Merciful. From Muhammad
ibn Abdu-llah the Messenger of
God, to Heraclius the Emperor
of Rome. Peace be upon him
who follows the guidance. I call
you to Islam. Accept Islam and
you will be safe. God will give
you your reward double-fold. If
you forsake the message of God,
you will carry the sin of all your
followers. Say: “O People of the
Book! Come to common terms
between us and you: that we
worship none but Allah; that we
associate no partners with Him;
that we erect not, from among
ourselves, Lords and patrons
other than Allah. If then they turn
back, say you: ‘Bear witness
that we are Muslims (submitting
to Allah’s Will). (3:64) Heraclius was the Emperor of the Byzantine Empire [610–641] who
captured Syria, Palestine, and Egypt from Persia [613–628] ).

96

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

Conclusion
The Divine Religion, Islam, is complete in all aspects. It is the constitution
for a fulfilling life in this world, and an eternal and everlasting one in the
Hereafter. You may find some deviated manners or faults in the way
Muslims deal with themselves and others, but know that Islam has nothing
to do with these shortcomings. This may be due to their ignorance of the
religion or weakness in their faith which leads them to do what you see.
So do not judge Islam according to what you may experience from some
of its followers. This small publication should be regarded as a key to start
researching the Truth. However, to further study Islam:
1) Remove any prejudice.
2) Have a true desire to reach the Truth
and not seek faults and errors.
3) Think independently and should not
blindly follow others.
Allah () says:
And when it is said to them, “Follow
what Allah has revealed,” they say,
“Rather, we will follow that upon which
we found our fathers.” Even if Satan
was inviting them to the punishment of
the Blaze?  (31:21).

97

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

How Does One Become a Muslim?
In order to become a Muslim, there are no specific religious rituals or
customs that you need to perform, either in specific areas or in the company
of others. This is because, in Islam, a person has a direct relationship with
his Lord without any intermediaries.
By simply believing and declaring that there is only one God and that
Muhammad is His slave and Messenger one thereby becomes Muslim.
Upon making this statement sincerely every sin in his/her life up to that point
is forgiven.
God says in the Holy Qur’an Except those who repent and believe and
do righteous deeds; for those, God will change their sins into good
deeds, and God is Ever Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful  (25:70) You begin
life again as a Muslim, one who submits to the will of God.
As for non-Muslims who have accepted Islam, they will be given their
reward in double, due to their belief in their messengers as well as their
belief in Muhammad (). Allah () says:
Those to whom We gave the Scripture
[Torah and the Gospel, etc.] before it, - they
believe in it (the Qur’an). * And when it is
recited to them, they say: We believe in
it. Verily, it is the truth from our Lord.
Indeed even before it we have been from
those who submit themselves to Allah
in Islam as Muslims. * These will be
given their reward twice over, because
they are patient, and repel evil with good,
and spend (in charity) out of what We have
provided them  (28:52-54)
In addition to this, Allah effaces all the sins they
did before accepting Islam. The Prophet () said:
“Islam effaces all [the sins one did] before it?” (Muslim).
98

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

References
1. W. Montgomery Watt is a Scottish Orientalist .
2. The Genuine Islam. Vol. 1, No. 8, 1936.
3. English theosophist, philosopher, and political figure who advocated home
rule and educational reforms in India.
4. That is to attest that Allah exists, and that He is the Creator of this universe
and its Owner. He is the One Who causes all things to happen; nothing
comes into existence except if He wills it, and nothing occurs except if He
desires it.
5. It is to attest that Allah is the only true god, Who deserves to be worshipped,
and all acts of worship must be dedicated to Him alone.
6. That is to believe in the uniqueness of His Names and Attributes and that
the beautiful Names and Attributes belong to Allah () and that He is far
removed from every imperfection .
7. Haskins, Charles Homer, 1870–1937, American historian, an authority on
medieval history.
8. William H. Allen, Dictionary of Technical Terms of Aerospace, First Edition.
9. Speeches Delivered in India, London 1890, p. 24.
10. Emotion as the Basis of Civilization, London, 1928, pp. 265, 269.
11. Islam – Her Moral and Spiritual Value, London, 1927, pp. 20-21.
12. Heroes, Hero-Worship and the Heroic in History.
13. G. Lemaître (1927). «Un Univers homogène de masse constante et de rayon
croissant rendant compte de la vitesse radiale des nébuleuses extragalactiques.»
Annals of the Scientific Society of Brussels 47A: 41. Translated in: (1931) «A
homogeneous universe of constant mass and growing radius accounting for
the radial velocity of extragalactic nebulae.» Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society 91: 483–490. Astronomy and Cosmonogy, Sir James H.
Jeans, p. 15.
14. Astronomy and Cosmonogy, Sir James H. Jeans, p. 15.
15. V. Slipher, paper presented to the American Astronomical Society (1915).
16. Edwin Hubble (1929). «A relation between distance and radial velocity among
extra-galactic nebulae.» Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 15: 168–173.
17. Any of a class of particles, such as the photon, pion, or alpha particle, that
has zero or integral spin and obeys statistical rules permitting any number of
identical particles to occupy the same quantum state.

99

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING ISLAM

18. Dr. Zaghlool El-Naggar, As-Samaa (The Sky).
19. For further information see: http://www.esa.int/esaSC/SEM75BS1VED_
extreme_0.html
20. See The Merck Manual, 18th Edition under ‘altitude sickness’.
21. He was the chief of the surgical clinic at the University of Paris.
22. The Bible, The Qur’an and Science.
23. Abdul-Ahad Omar is a Canadian Muslim. He is notable for being a former
Christian theologian and minister who converted to Islam.
24. He is the world-renowned embryologist. He was the former president of the
Canadian Association of Anatomists, Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology,
University of Toronto.
25. Dr. Gerald C. Goeringer is course director and associate professor of Medical
Embryology at the Department of Cell Biology, School of Medicine, Georgetown
University, Washington, DC, USA.
26. White, Harvey E. Modern College Physics, van Nostrand 1948.
27. Oceans, Elder and Pernetta, p. 27 Also see: Oceans, Day, Trevor, pp. 46-47.
28. Oceanography, Gross, p. 205.
29. See: Earth Science, Tarbuck, Edward J., Lutgens, Frederick J, pp. 509-525. Also
see Mountain Meteorology, Whiteman, David C., pp. 100-116.
30. See: The Atmosphere, Anthes, Richard A.; John J. Cahir; Alistair B. Fraser;
and Hans A. Panofsky, p. 269. Also see: The Elements of Meteorology, Miller
and Thompson, pp. 141-142. Also see: Earth Science Today, Murphy, Brendan;
Nance, Damian. pg. 346.
31. The Bible, The Qur’an and Science.
32. Earth, Press and Siever, p. 435. Also see: Earth Science, Tarbuck and Lutgens,
p. 157. Also see: The Geological Concept of Mountains in the Quran, El-Naggar,
p. 5. Also see: Earth Science Today, Murphy, Brendan; Nance, Damian. p. 107.
33. The Geological Concept of Mountains in the Qur’an, El-Naggar, p. 5. Also see:
Mountain Chains from World of Earth Science.
34. Towards Understanding Islam, pg. 3.

100

Allah () says:

We will show them Our
Signs in the universe, and
in their own selves, until it
becomes manifest to them that
this (the Qur’an) is the truth. Is it
not sufficient in regard to your
Lord that He is a Witness
over
all
things?
(Qur’an 41:53)

If you would like to know more information about
Islam, you may visit the following sites:
http://www.islamreligion.com
http://www.islam-guide.com
http://www.thekeytoislam.com
http://www.islamtomorrow.com
http://www.islamhouse.com
http://www.islamqa.info
http://www.womeninislam.ws
http://www.1ststepsinislam.com
http://www.chatislamonline.org
http://islamweb.net/

